

--- PAGE 21 ---

21
Provide a written asthma action plan 
Give all patients (or parents/caregivers) a written asthma action plan, so they can recognize worsening asthma and act 
appropriately. The plan can be handwritten, printed, digital or pictorial – not just spoken instructions. It must be suitable
for the person’s level of asthma control, and their ability to understand health information and follow the instructions.
The written asthma action plan should include:
 • The patient’
s usual asthma medications
 • When to increase inhaled medications and how to do this (page 33)
 • When to start oral corticosteroids, if needed
 • How to get urgent medical care if symptoms continue or worsen.
Action plans can be based on symptoms and/or (in adults) PEF.
Choosing asthma medication for adults and adolescents
Starting treatment 
Adults and adolescents with asthma should not be treated with SABA alone. They should all receive ICS-containing
treatment. The optimal treatment that should be started immediately after diagnosis of asthma depends on the patient’s 
history and current symptoms (Table 3). Most adults and adolescents should start with low-dose ICS-containing treatment 
(page 44). The preferred treatment options use ICS-formoterol as the patient’s reliever, instead of SABA (page 22). This is 
called anti-inflammatory reliever (AIR) therapy.
Before starting treatment:
 • Record evidence for the diagnosis of asthma
 • Document symptom control and risk factors
 • Assess lung function, when possible
 • T
rain the patient to use the inhaler correctly, and check their technique
 • Schedule a follow-up visit.
Treatment tracks 
There are two approaches to asthma treatment for adults and adolescents (Figure 5):
 • The preferred treatment, in which the reliever is low-dose ICS-formoterol (“T
rack 1”, page 24).
 • Alternative treatment regimens in which the reliever is SABA, or a combination of ICS and SABA
 (ICS-SABA)  
 
   (“T
rack 2”, page 25).
GINA recommends Track 1 because there is strong evidence that it reduces the risk of severe exacerbations, compared 
with Track 2, with similar symptom control. Track 1 is also simpler, because it requires only one medication and one
inhaler technique across treatment steps 1–4.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 22 ---

22
TABLE 3. Suggested initial treatment for adults and adolescents with asthma
Clinical features Preferred (GINA Track 1) Alternatives (GINA Track 2)
Infrequent asthma symptoms (for 
example, 1–2 days/week or less)
Low-dose ICS-formoterol taken as 
needed
Low-dose ICS taken whenever 
SABA is taken for asthma
symptoms (combination or separate 
inhalers)
Asthma symptoms less than 3–5 
days/week, with normal or mildly 
reduced lung function
Low-dose ICS-formoterol taken as 
needed
Regular daily low-dose ICS, plus 
SABA as needed
Asthma symptoms most days,
waking due to asthma once a week 
or more, or low lung function
Low-dose ICS-formoterol
maintenance-and-reliever therapy 
(MART)
Regular daily low-dose ICS-LABA, 
plus SABA or ICS-SABA as needed
Regular daily medium-dose ICS, 
plus SABA or ICS-SABA as needed
Daily asthma symptoms, waking 
at night with asthma once a week 
or more, with low lung function, or 
current smokers
Medium-dose ICS-formoterol MART Regular daily medium-dose
ICS-LABA, plus SABA or ICS-SABA 
as needed
Regular daily high-dose ICS plus 
SABA as needed
During acute asthma exacerbation Treat exacerbation (page 34). Start 
medium-dose ICS-formoterol MART
Treat exacerbation (page 34).
Start regular daily medium-dose
ICS-LABA, plus SABA as needed
ICS: inhaled corticosteroids; MART: maintenance-and-reliever therapy with ICS-formoterol; SABA: short-acting beta2-agonist. See page 
45 for medications and doses for AIR/MART. See page 44 for total daily ICS doses for patients using a SABA or ICS-SABA reliever.
GINA Track 1 is preferred because it reduces the risk of severe exacerbations compared with treatment with a SABA
reliever, and it is simpler. Check local regulatory and payer criteria.
Adjusting treatment 
After the patient has started treatment, reassess asthma at every visit, adjust treatment if necessary, and review the
response to treatment.
Within each track, treatment can be stepped up or down, using the same reliever at each step. A patient can switch from 
one track to another, if needed. At each step, there are also some other controller options with less evidence for efficacy 
and safety, or with specific indications.
If a patient’s asthma is not well controlled, check adherence, inhaler technique, risk factors and comorbidities first, before 
stepping up treatment or changing to a different medication at the same step.
If asthma has been well controlled for 3 months or more, consider stepping down.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 23 ---

23
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention                                                                            © GINA 2025   www .ginasthma.org
FIGURE 5. Treatment steps for adults and adolescents
Non-pharmacologic strategies include smoking cessation, physical activity, pulmonary rehabilitation, weight reduction, vaccinations (see text for more) 
Allergen immunotherapy, e.g. HDM SLIT: consider for patients with clinically relevant sensitization and not well-controlled (but stable) asthma See text for further information and safety advice  
GINA 2025 
Adults & adolescents 
12+ years
Personalized asthma management 
Assess, Adjust, Review  
for individual patient needs
TRACK 1: PREFERRED 
CONTROLLER and RELIEVER
Using ICS-formoterol as the reliever* 
reduces the risk of exacerbations 
compared with using a SABA reliever, 
and is a simpler regimen
TRACK 2: Alternative 
CONTROLLER and RELIEVER
Before considering a regimen  
with SABA reliever, check if the 
patient is likely to adhere to daily 
controller treatment
Symptoms 
Exacerbations
Side-effects
Comorbidities
Lung function
Consider biomarkers
Patient (and parent/caregiver) satisfaction
Comorbidities
Inhaler technique & adherence
Patient (and parent/caregiver) preferences and goals
Non-pharmacological strategies 
Asthma medications including ICS
Education & skills training, action plan
ASSESS
ADJUST
REVIEW
STEPS 1 – 2
AIR-only*: low-dose ICS-formoterol as needed
STEP 3
MART* with  
low-dose maintenance 
ICS-formoterol
STEP 4
MART* with  
medium-dose 
maintenance  
ICS-formoterol
STEP 5
Add-on LAMA
Refer for assessment of 
phenotype. Consider trial 
of high-dose maintenance 
ICS-formoterol. Consider 
anti-IgE, anti-IL5/5R,  
anti-IL4Rα, anti-TSLP
RELIEVER: As-needed low-dose ICS-formoterol*
See GINA 
severe 
asthma guide
STEP 1
Reliever only; if SABA, 
take ICS with each dose
STEP 2
Low dose  
maintenance ICS
STEP 3
Low dose 
maintenance 
ICS-LABA
STEP 4
Medium dose 
maintenance 
ICS-LABA
STEP 5
Add-on LAMA
Refer for assessment of 
phenotype. Consider trial 
of high-dose maintenance 
ICS-LABA. Consider  
anti-IgE, anti-IL5/5R,  
anti-IL4Rα, anti-TSLP
RELIEVER: as-needed ICS-SABA*, or as-needed SABA
*AIR: Anti-inflammatory reliever; HDM: house dust mite; Ig: immunoglobulin; ICS: inhaled corticosteroids; IL: interleukin; LABA: long-acting beta2-agonist; 
LAMA: long-acting muscarinic antagonist; MART: maintenance-and reliever therapy with ICS-formoterol; OCS: oral corticosteroid; SLIT: sublingual
immunotherapy; TSLP: thymic stromal lymphopoietin.  †If prescribing LTRA, advise patient/caregiver about risk of neuropsychiatric adverse effects.
See page 44 for information about doses of ICS-formoterol and frequency of use.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 24 ---

24
Track 1 treatment options for adults and adolescents 
In Track 1, across all steps, the patient takes low-dose ICS-formoterol whenever needed to relieve asthma symptoms
(Figure 6). Patients can also use low-dose ICS-formoterol before exercise or before or during exposure to allergens,
if needed. The same ICS-formoterol inhaler is also used for the patient’s maintenance treatment in Steps 3–5.
FIGURE 6. Track 1 (preferred) treatment Steps 1–4 for adults and adolescents
AIR: anti-inflammatory reliever; ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; form: formoterol; MART: maintenance-and-reliever therapy with
ICS-formoterol. See page 44 for ICS-formoterol doses and frequency of use.
Steps 1–2: The recommended treatment is low-dose ICS-formoterol taken whenever needed to relieve asthma
symptoms. In clinical trials this treatment reduced the risk of emergency room visits or hospitalizations by about two-thirds 
compared with SABA alone, and by over one-third compared with low dose ICS (plus SABA as needed for asthma
symptoms), in patients who previously used SABA alone, low-dose ICS, or a leukotriene receptor antagonist.
In Steps 3–5, patients take combination ICS-formoterol as daily maintenance treatment, and they take extra doses of 
the same medication when they have asthma symptoms. This is called “maintenance-and-reliever therapy” (MART) with 
ICS-formoterol. In patients with or without a history of severe exacerbations, MART reduces the risk of severe
exacerbations, with a similar level of symptom control, compared with other maintenance treatments (including ICS-LABA 
and higher-dose ICS) plus as-needed SABA. (Note: ICS-LABA inhalers that do not include formoterol cannot be used as 
MART.)
Recommended doses for ICS-formoterol combinations at all steps are shown in the reference table on page 44.
See the full 2025 GINA Report for a summary of evidence supporting each option.
Step 5 options for adults and adolescents with severe asthma are shown on page 26.
STEPS 1 – 2
Take 1 inhalation ICS-form as 
needed (AIR-only)
STEP 3
Take 1 inhalation ICS-form  
morning and evening, and 1 
as needed (Step 3 MART)
STEP 4
Take 2 inhalations ICS-form 
morning and evening, and 1 
as needed (Step 4 MART)
STEP 5
Refer for expert 
assessment, 
phenotyping,  
and add-on  
treatment for  
severe asthma
These examples are for budesonide-formoterol 160/4.5 mcg or BDP-formoterol 100/6 mcg, DPI or pMDI. See Table 7 for other formulations. 
TRACK 1, Steps 1–4: the PREFERRED treatment for adults and adolescents. 
Using ICS-formoterol as eliever (AIR), with or without maintenance ICS-formoterol, 
reduces the risk of exacerbations compared with using a SABA reliever, and is a simpler regimen, with a 
single medication and dose across treatment steps.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 25 ---

25
Track 2 treatment options for adults and adolescents 
In Track 2 the reliever is as-needed SABA or ICS-SABA (Figure 7). This is an alternative approach when ICS-formoterol is 
not available. Track 2 may also be considered if a patient has stable asthma and no exacerbations with their maintenance 
ICS-containing treatment, they take it regularly, and they prefer to continue with this treatment.
FIGURE 7. Track 2 (alternative) treatment Steps 1–4 for adults and adolescents
*A anti-inflammatory reliever (AIR); ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; LABA: long-acting beta2-agonist; SABA: short acting beta2-agonist. See 
page 44 for ICS doses.
In Step 1, the patient uses a SABA when symptoms occur and takes a low dose of ICS at the same time. This can be 
done by using a combination inhaler that contains ICS and SABA, or the patient can take a low dose of ICS immediately 
after using SABA, every time they have symptoms.
In Steps 2–5, the patient takes maintenance ICS-containing medication every day, plus SABA as needed to relieve
symptoms. In Steps 3–5, adults (≥ 18 years) can use a combination of ICS and SABA in a single inhaler  as their reliever 
(if available) instead of SABA. This reduces the risk of exacerbations, compared with using a SABA reliever.
At any step, patients can also take their reliever before exercise, if needed.
If maintenance and reliever medications are in different types of inhalers, or if changing steps requires a change in inhaler 
type, train the patient in the correct techniques.
There is strong evidence that taking ICS every day, even at a low dose, substantially reduces the risks of severe
exacerbations, hospitalizations and death due to asthma, improves symptoms, and reduces exercise-induced
bronchoconstriction, compared with SABA-only treatment. Even in patients with symptoms one day per week or less,
the risk of severe exacerbations is halved, compared with using SABA alone.
Before prescribing a regimen with SABA reliever, consider whether the patient is likely to use ICS correctly. A patient with 
low adherence will be exposed to SABA-only treatment and have a higher risk of exacerbations. A maintenance-and-
reliever regimen with ICS-formoterol (Track 1) would be safer for such patients.
See page 44 for inhaled corticosteroid doses. See the full 2025 GINA Report for a summary of evidence supporting each option.
Note: ICS-formoterol should not be used as reliever for patients using daily ICS-LABA with a different (non-formoterol) LABA.
STEP 1
No maintenance ICS. 
If reliever is SABA,  
take ICS whenever 
SABA used
STEP 3
Low dose  
maintenance 
ICS-LABA
STEP 4
Medium dose 
maintenance  
ICS-LABA
STEP 5
Refer for expert 
assessment, 
phenotyping,  
and add-on 
treatment for 
severe asthma
RELIEVER: as-needed ICS-SABA*, or as-needed SABA
STEP 2
Low dose 
maintenance 
ICS
TRACK 2, Steps 1–4: Alternative CONTROLLER and RELIEVER for adults 
and adolescents. 
Before considering a regimen with SABA reliever, check if the patient is likely to adhere to daily ICS 
treatment. If controller and reliever are in different types of inhaler device, or if changing steps requires a 
change in device, train patient in the correct inhaler technique.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 26 ---

26
Other treatment options for some adults and adolescents 
Some other treatment options may be available in some countries, that either have specific indications, or have less
evidence for efficacy or safety compared with the main treatments shown in Track 1 and 2. 
Specific allergen immunotherapy: If an adult or adolescent has house dust mite allergy, and their asthma is not well 
controlled by treatment that includes ICS, consider adding house dust mite sublingual immunotherapy. Do not use
sublingual immunotherapy if forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV
1) is ≤70% predicted. See the full 2025 GINA
Report for information on immunotherapy with other antigens.
Long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA): Compared with ICS-LABA, add-on LAMA slightly improves lung function 
and slightly reduces the risk of exacerbations, but there is no clinically important reduction in symptoms such as
breathlessness. Before considering add-on LAMA for patients with exacerbations, increase ICS dose to at least medium, 
or switch to MART. Currently available LAMAs include tiotropium in a separate mist inhaler (patients ≥6 years) and
combination inhalers containing ICS, LABA and a LAMA (patients ≥18 years) including beclometasone-formoterol-
glycopyrronium, fluticasone furoate-vilanterol-umeclidinium, and mometasone-indacaterol-glycopyrronium. 
Leukotriene receptor antagonists: These include montelukast, pranlukast, zafirlukast and zileuton. They are less
effective than daily ICS, particularly for preventing exacerbations. Montelukast has been associated with risk of serious 
mental health effects.
Step 5: managing severe asthma in adults and adolescents 
If a patient has uncontrolled symptoms and/or exacerbations despite Step 4 treatment, assess causes and optimize
treatment. Refer the patient for expert assessment, including assessment of severe asthma inflammatory phenotype,
comorbidities, risk factors, and for potential add-on treatment. If sputum eosinophil count is available, this test may be 
useful to guide treatment in patients with moderate–severe asthma.
High-dose ICS-LABA can be considered, but it increases the risk of side effects, including adrenal suppression
(see Section 8 of the full 2025 GINA Report for details).
Long-acting muscarinic antagonists can be used in addition to maintenance ICS-LABA treatment, but the potential
reduction in severe exacerbations is small (page 33).
Biologic treatment can be added to maximal treatment, if available and affordable. Options include:
 • Anti-immunoglobin E (subcutaneous omalizumab) for severe allergic asthma 
 • Ant
i-interleukin 5 or anti-interleukin 5 receptor alpha for severe eosinophilic asthma. Options include intravenous  
   reslizumab for patients aged ≥18 years, subcutaneous mepolizumab for patients aged ≥ 6 years, and
   subcutaneous benralizumab for patients aged ≥ 12 years.
 • Anti-interleukin 4 receptor alpha (subcutaneous dupilumab) for severe eosinophilic asthma/asthma with 
Type 2  
 
   airway inflammation or patients who need maintenance oral corticosteroids
 • Anti-thymic stromal lymphopoietin (subcutaneous tezepelumab) for severe asthma.
See list of asthma medications on page 38. 
Always check local eligibility criteria for specific add-on treatments.
Maintenance oral corticosteroids should only be used as a last resort, and at the lowest possible dose, because
short-term and long-term systemic side-effects are common and serious.
For more information, see the full 2025 GINA Report or the GINA booklet Difficult-to-treat and severe asthma in
adolescent and adult patients, available at ginasthma.org.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 27 ---

27
Stepping down treatment when asthma is well controlled 
When good asthma control has been maintained for 2–3 months, consider stepping down treatment. The aims are to find 
the lowest treatment step that controls both symptoms and exacerbations, and to minimize side-effects.
Choose an appropriate time for step-down (no respiratory infection, patient not travelling, not pregnant). Assess risk
factors for exacerbation, including history of previous exacerbations or emergency department visits for asthma, and low 
lung function (see Table 2, page 12).
Record symptom control and lung function before stepping down, provide a written asthma action plan, monitor closely, 
and plan a follow-up visit.
Reduce the ICS dose by 25–50% by changing to an inhaler with a lower strength of the same ICS or by reducing the 
frequency of inhalations (see Box 4-13 in the full 2025 GINA Report for information on how to step down from different 
treatments). Review asthma after each step-down, and wait 2–3 months to confirm asthma is stable before stepping down 
again. Do not completely stop ICS in adults or adolescents with asthma.
Non-recommended treatments 
Maintenance oral corticosteroids should only be used as a last resort.
GINA does not recommend oral salbutamol, oral theophylline, or inhaled fenoterol, because of the increased risk of
adverse effects.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 28 ---

28
TABLE 4. Suggested initial treatment for children with asthma
Clinical features Preferred
Infrequent asthma symptoms
(for example, 1–2 days/week or less)
Low-dose ICS taken whenever SABA is taken for asthma
symptoms (combination or separate inhalers)
Asthma symptoms 2–5 days per week Low-dose ICS maintenance (daily) treatment, plus SABA as needed
Asthma symptoms most days, waking 
due to asthma once a week or more
Options:
    • Low-dose maintenance ICS, plus SABA as needed
    • Medium-dose maintenance ICS, plus SABA as needed
    • Very-low-dose ICS-formoterol maintenance-and-reliever therapy     
 
      (MART)
Asthma symptoms every day
, waking 
at night once or more a week, and low 
lung function
Options:
    • Medium-dose maintenance ICS-LABA, plus SABA as needed
    • Low-dose ICS-formoterol MART
During acute asthma exacerbation Treat exacerbation (page 34).
Start treatment with one of these options:
    • Low-dose or medium-dose maintenance ICS-LABA, plus SABA as 
 
      needed
    • Very-low-dose or low-dose ICS-formoterol MAR
T.
ICS: inhaled corticosteroids; LABA: long-acting beta2-agonist; MART: maintenance-and-reliever therapy with ICS-formoterol; SABA: 
short-acting beta2-agonist. See page 45 for formulations and doses used for MART in children. See page 44 for ICS doses for
maintenance ICS-containing treatment. Check local regulatory and payer criteria.
Choosing asthma medication for children 6–11 years
Starting asthma treatment   
Children aged 6–11 years with asthma should not be treated with SABA alone; they should all receive ICS-containing 
treatment. The optimal treatment that should be started immediately after diagnosis of asthma depends on the child’s 
asthma history and current symptoms (Table 4).
When starting treatment:
 • Record evidence for the diagnosis of asthma
 • Document symptom control and risk factors (see T
able 2) before starting treatment
 • Assess lung function, when possible, before starting treatment
 • T
rain the child and parents to use the inhaler correctly, and check their technique
 • Schedule a follow-up visit.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE