

--- PAGE 11 ---

11
Assessing asthma
Assess each person’s asthma at every visit. The most important times to reassess asthma are after an exacerbation, and 
when the patient needs a new prescription for asthma medication. Also assess each person’s asthma at least once every 
year, even if they have no symptoms.
How to assess asthma control 
Asthma control means how much asthma is affecting the person’s health or their risk of future health problems, on their 
current asthma treatment.
Asthma control includes both:
 • Control of asthma symptoms (T
able 2A, page 12) – assess symptom control at every opportunity. People with  
 
   poorly controlled asthma symptoms have a high risk of exacerbations. Symptoms are also a burden for patients.
 • Control of risk factors (T
able 2B, page 12) – identify features that increase the patient’s future risk of having
   exacerbations (flare-ups, attacks), loss of lung function, or medication side-effects. 
Assess risk factors at
   diagnosis and then periodically, including after the patient has had an exacerbation.
Lung function: Measure lung function with spirometry (or with a PEF meter
, if spirometry is not possible). Measure lung 
function before starting ICS treatment, 3–6 months later, and then at least once every 1–2 years. Measure lung function 
more often in people with a high risk of exacerbations and people with risk factors for lung function decline (Table 2B).
If a patient has few symptoms despite poor lung function, or good lung function despite frequent symptoms, investigate for 
underlying conditions.
Treatment issues: Document the patient’s current treatment. Ask about side-effects. Check inhaler technique by
watching the patient use their inhaler. Check adherence to treatment by asking the patient how often they take their
medicines and whether they have any problems. Check that the patient has a written asthma action plan (page 21).
Ask the patient about their goals and preferences for asthma treatment.
Assess multimorbidity: Check whether any other medical conditions are causing symptoms, affecting quality of life, or 
making asthma harder to control (for example, rhinitis, rhinosinusitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, obesity, obstructive 
sleep apnea, or depression and anxiety).
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 12 ---

12
TABLE 2. Assessment of asthma control in adults, adolescents and children 6–11 years
A. Assess symptom control 
In the past 4 weeks, has the patient had:
Daytime symptoms more than twice/week?
Any night waking due to asthma?
SABA* reliever needed more than twice/week?
Any activity limitation due to asthma?
*Only for patients using SABA reliever (not ICS-formoterol reliever). Do not include SABA taken before exercise.
B. Assess risk factors
B.1. Risk factors for exacerbations
Uncontrolled asthma symptoms (important risk factor)
Other factors that increase risk of exacerbations, even if the person has few asthma symptoms
• Over-use of SABA (≥3 x 200-dose canisters/year)†
• Inadequate ICS (no ICS, poor adherence, incorrect inhaler technique)
• Medical conditions (obesity, chronic rhinosinusitis, GERD, confirmed food allergy) or pregnancy
• Exposure to allergens (if sensitized), smoking, vaping, air pollution
• Major psychological or socioeconomic problems
• Poor lung function (especially if FEV
1 <60% predicted), large FEV1 response to bronchodilator
• Type 2 inflammatory markers (higher blood eosinophil level, high FeNO)§
• Severe exacerbation in past year or lifetime history of intubation or ICU admission for asthma
B.2. Risk factors for developing persistent airflow limitation
• History of preterm birth, low birth weight and rapid infant weight gain, frequent productive cough
• Lack of ICS treatment in patient with a history of severe exacerbations
• Exposure to tobacco smoke or noxious chemicals
• Low initial FEV
1
• High eosinophil levels in sputum or blood
B.3. Risk factors for side-effects of medication
• Systemic effects: frequent OCS, long-term high-dose and/or potent ICS, P450 inhibitors‡
• Local effects: high-dose and/or potent ICS, poor inhaler technique
Level of asthma symptom control
Well
controlled
Partly
controlled
Uncontrolled
None
of these
1–2
of these
3–4 
of these
FeNO: fractional exhaled nitric oxide; FEV1: Forced expiratory volume in 1 second; GERD: gastroesophageal reflux disease;
ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; OCS: oral corticosteroids; SABA: short-acting beta2-agonist; ICU: intensive care unit
† Also increases risk of asthma death, especially if very high use (≥1 canister per month)
‡ Cytochrome P450 inhibitors such as ritonavir, ketoconazole, itraconazole may increase systemic exposure to some types of ICS and 
some long-acting beta2-agonists
§ Several factors affect blood eosinophils and FeNO, including sex, age, smoking status & time of day. See GINA 2025 report for details.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 13 ---

13
How to assess asthma severity 
Asthma severity usually means the level of treatment needed to control a person’s symptoms and to prevent
exacerbations. Severity can be assessed after several months of treatment.
Difficult-to-treat asthma is asthma that is uncontrolled despite prescribing of medium- or high-dose ICS with a second 
controller (usually a LABA) or with maintenance OCS, or that requires high-dose treatment to maintain good symptom 
control and reduce the risk of exacerbations. It does not mean a ‘difficult patient’. In many cases, asthma may appear to 
be difficult to treat because of modifiable factors such as incorrect inhaler technique, poor adherence, smoking or
comorbidities, or because the diagnosis is incorrect.
Asthma is severe if it is still uncontrolled despite good adherence with high-dose ICS-LABA and management of
contributory factors, or if the patient needs high-dose ICS-LABA to maintain good asthma control.
Asthma is mild if it can be well controlled with ICS-formoterol taken as needed (page 23), or with low-dose ICS taken 
daily. 
However, the term “mild asthma” is often understood or used differently than this in the community. Many people with 
infrequent asthma symptoms think that their asthma is mild and that they do not need ICS treatment because they have 
not had any severe attacks. Therefore, you should explain that people with infrequent or mild asthma symptoms can have 
severe or fatal exacerbations if they are treated only with SABA. Explain that treatment with low-dose ICS or as-needed 
low-dose ICS-formoterol reduces the risk of severe exacerbations by half to two-thirds, compared with SABA alone.
How to investigate uncontrolled asthma 
Most patients can achieve good asthma control with treatment that contains ICS, but some patients do not. In these
cases, look for the cause (Figure 2) before changing the treatment. Always check inhaler technique and adherence first.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 14 ---

14
FIGURE 2. Investigating asthma in a patient who has poor symptom control or exacerbations  
           despite treatment
GERD: gastroesophageal reflux disease; ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; NSAID: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; Track 1: see page 24.
Compare inhaler technique with a device-specific checklist, and correct errors; 
recheck frequently. Have an empathic discussion about barriers to adherence.
Watch patient using  
their inhaler. 
Discuss adherence  
and barriers to use
If lung function normal during symptoms, consider halving ICS dose and  
repeating lung function after 2–3 weeks. Consider biomarkers for Type 2 asthma.
Confirm the diagnosis  
of asthma
Reduce potential  
risk factors.
Assess and manage 
comorbidities
• For adults/adolescents, switch to GINA Track 1 if available
• Check for risk factors or inducers such as smoking, beta-blockers,  
NSAIDs, allergen exposure. Check for and manage conditions such  
as rhinitis, obesity, GERD, depression/anxiety.
Consider short-term step up to next treatment level. Use shared  
decision-making, and balance potential benefits and risks.
Consider short-term 
treatment step-up
Refer for expert  
advice
If asthma still uncontrolled after 3–6 months on Step 4 treatment, refer for expert 
advice. Refer earlier if asthma symptoms severe, or doubts about diagnosis.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE