

--- PAGE 29 ---

29
Summary Guide for Asthma Management and Prevention                                                                            © GINA 2025   www .ginasthma.org
FIGURE 8. Treatment steps for children 6–11 years
ICS: inhaled corticosteroids; Ig: immunoglobulin; IL: interleukin; LABA: long-acting beta2-agonist; LTRA: leukotriene receptor antagonist; MART: maintenance-and-reliever 
therapy with ICS-formoterol; OCS: oral corticosteroid; SABA: short-acting beta2-agonist; *Anti-inflammatory reliever; †If prescribing LTRA, advise patient/caregiver about risk 
of neuropsychiatric adverse effects. See reference table on page 45 for MART doses. See reference table on page 44 for total daily ICS doses.
PREFERRED 
CONTROLLER
to prevent exacerbations 
and control symptoms
Other controller options 
(limited indications, or  
less evidence for efficacy 
or safety)
RELIEVER 
GINA 2025 
Children 6–11 years
Personalized asthma 
management:
Assess, Adjust, Review
Asthma medication options: 
Adjust treatment up and down for  
individual child’s needs
Symptoms 
Exacerbations
Side-effects
Comorbidities
Lung function
Child and parent/caregiver satisfaction
Confirmation of diagnosis if necessary
Symptom control & modifiable risk factors
Comorbidities
Inhaler technique & adherence
Child and parent/caregiver preferences and goals
Treatment of modifiable risk factors and comorbidities
Non-pharmacological strategies 
Asthma medications including ICS
Education & skills training, action plan
ADJUST
REVIEW
Only as last resort, 
consider add-on
low dose OCS, but 
consider side-effects
STEP 1
Low dose ICS  
taken whenever 
SABA taken*
STEP 2
Daily low dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) 
(see table of ICS dose ranges for children)
Daily leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA†), or 
low dose ICS taken whenever SABA taken*
STEP 3
Low-dose ICS-LABA,  
OR medium-dose 
ICS, OR very low-
dose ICS-formoterol 
maintenance and 
reliever (MART)*
STEP 4
Medium-dose  
ICS-LABA, OR 
low-dose ICS-
formoterol MART*  
OR 
refer for expert 
advice
STEP 5
Refer for 
phenotypic 
assessment 
± higher dose 
ICS-LABA or 
add-on therapy, 
e.g. LAMA,
anti-IgE, anti-
IL4Rα, anti-IL5
Add tiotropium 
or add LTRA
†
Low dose 
ICS + LTRA
†
As-needed SABA (or ICS-formoterol reliever* in MART in Steps 3 and 4)
ASSESS
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 30 ---

30
Treatment steps for children 6–11 years 
After the child has started treatment, reassess asthma at every visit, adjust treatment if necessary, and review the
response to treatment. If a patient’s asthma is not well controlled, check adherence, inhaler technique, risk factors and
comorbidities first, before stepping up treatment or changing to a different medication at the same step (page 29). If
asthma has been well controlled for 3 months or more, consider stepping down.
In Step 1, the child uses a SABA when symptoms occur and takes a low dose of ICS at the same time.
In Steps 2–5 the child takes maintenance ICS-containing treatment every day. ICS, even at a low dose, reduces the risk 
of severe exacerbations, improves lung function, and reduces symptoms, compared with no ICS.
In Step 2, the child takes a low total dose of ICS every day, plus SABA as needed for symptoms.
In Steps 3–4, the child takes ICS or ICS-LABA every day, plus reliever as needed. There are several options:
 • The child takes ICS as daily maintenance treatment, plus SABA
 as needed for symptoms.
 • The child takes combination ICS-LABA
 as daily maintenance treatment, plus SABA as needed for symptoms.
 • The child takes combination ICS-formoterol as daily maintenance treatment, and they take extra doses of the  
 
   same medication when they have asthma symptoms. 
This is called “maintenance-and-reliever therapy” (MART).
   ICS-formoterol is the only ICS-LABA that can be used for MAR
T. 
Recommended doses for ICS-formoterol combinations are shown in the table on page 45. See page 44 for total daily ICS 
doses for children using a SABA reliever. See the full 2025 GINA report for a summary evidence supporting each option.
If a child needs Step 4 treatment to control asthma, refer them to a pediatric asthma expert.
Step 5 options for children with severe asthma are shown below.
At any step, the child can also take their reliever (SABA or ICS-formoterol) before exercise, if needed. For children
prescribed MART, their ICS-formoterol reliever can also be taken before or during exposure to allergens, to prevent and 
relieve symptoms.
Step 5: managing severe asthma in children 
If a child has uncontrolled symptoms and/or exacerbations despite good inhaler technique and good adherence with
Step 4 treatment, refer them to a pediatric asthma expert if available for phenotypic assessment and review of factors
contributing to symptoms and/or exacerbations.
Add-on treatments that may be considered for children with severe asthma include: 
Tiotropium can be added to other recommended treatments
Biologic treatment added to other recommended treatments. Options for children include:
 • Anti-immunoglobin E (subcutaneous omalizumab) for severe allergic asthma 
 • Anti-interleukin 5 (subcutaneous mepolizumab) for severe eosinophilic asthma
 • Anti-interleukin 4 receptor alpha (subcutaneous dupilumab) for severe eosinophilic asthma/asthma with 
Type 2  
 
   airway inflammation.
See table of asthma medication classes on page 38 for more details. Always check local eligibility criteria for specific
add-on treatments.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 31 ---

31
After referral – other treatments for children 6–11 years 
If the child’s asthma is not well-controlled on Step 3 or 4 treatment despite good adherence and correct inhaler technique, 
they should be referred for expert advice, if available. 
Medication options that may be considered for some children after referral include: 
Add-on long-acting muscarinic antagonist: At Step 4, tiotropium in a separate mist inhaler can be added to
recommended treatment.
High-dose ICS-LABA: At Step 4, the dose may be increased to high pediatric dose (see Table 6 on page 44),
but first consider the risk of side-effects.
Leukotriene antagonist: A leukotriene antagonist can be added to recommended treatment. Montelukast has been
associated with risk of serious mental health effects in some children.
Specific allergen immunotherapy: If a child with asthma has ragweed allergy, consider adding ragweed sublingual
immunotherapy before and during the ragweed season. Do not use sublingual immunotherapy if forced expiratory volume 
in 1 second (FEV
1) is <80% predicted. See the full 2025 GINA Report for information on allergen immunotherapy with 
other antigens.
Non-recommended treatments 
Maintenance oral corticosteroids should only be used as a last resort.
GINA does not recommend use of oral salbutamol, oral theophylline, or inhaled fenoterol, because of the increased risk of 
adverse effects.
Stepping down treatment when asthma is well controlled 
When good asthma control has been achieved and maintained for 2–3 months, consider stepping down treatment. The 
aims are to find the lowest treatment step that controls both symptoms and exacerbations, and to minimize side-effects.
Managing asthma in specific populations or contexts
Occupational asthma 
If asthma was caused by airborne irritants or allergens in the workplace, ICS treatment should be started immediately.
For suspected occupational asthma, refer the patient as soon as possible for expert care, if available. Exposure to the 
cause should be eliminated.
Pregnancy 
Asthma control often changes during pregnancy, so asthma should be monitored every 4–6 weeks. All pregnant women 
with asthma should receive treatment that includes ICS, because asthma exacerbations are associated with increased 
risk of pre-term delivery, low birth weight and increased perinatal mortality, and these risks are reduced by ICS. Usual 
asthma treatment should not be stopped. ICS and beta
2-agonists are not associated with increased risk of fetal
abnormalities. Treat exacerbations as for non-pregnant adults, to avoid fetal hypoxia.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE