

--- PAGE 6 ---

6
Diagnosing Asthma
Asthma has two defining features (Figure 1, Table 1) : 
 • A
 history of typical respiratory symptoms that are variable, meaning that they are sometimes more frequent and  
 
   more severe than at other times, AND
 • Variable expiratory airflow
. However, in people with asthma for many years, airflow limitation may become  
 
   permanent.
Symptoms can include wheeze, difficult breathing, a feeling of tightness in the chest, and cough.
Physical examination is often normal. Wheezing may be heard, especially during forced expiration.
The diagnosis of asthma should be confirmed, and the evidence should be documented in the patient's medical
record. T
o confirm the diagnosis of asthma, there should be a history of typical variable respiratory symptoms and
evidence of variable expiratory airflow (current or previous). If patients are already taking ICS treatment, additional tests 
may be needed to confirm the diagnosis of asthma (see page 9 and GINA 2025 Box 1-4).
Definitions
Asthma: a chronic (long-term) respiratory disease with many variations (phenotypes), usually characterized by chronic 
airway inflammation. Asthma causes respiratory symptoms that get better or worse at different times. Symptoms include
wheezing, difficult breathing, chest tightness and cough. These symptoms can be mild or severe, frequent or infrequent. 
When a person with asthma has symptoms, the flow of air out of their lungs is reduced. It is difficult to breathe out
because the airways become narrower (bronchoconstriction), the airway walls become thicker, and there is more mucus. 
In people with untreated asthma, expiratory airflow decreases more often and much more than in people without asthma.
Triggers: anything that can cause asthma symptoms, or make symptoms worse. Triggers include viral respiratory
infections, allergens in the air at home or work (for example, house dust mite, pets, pollens, or cockroach particles),
tobacco smoke or vaping, exercise, and stress. These are more likely to cause asthma symptoms when asthma is not 
already controlled by treatment. Some medicines (for example, beta-blockers) can cause asthma symptoms or
exacerbations. In some patients, aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs cause asthma symptoms or
exacerbations.
Asthma exacerbation (also called asthma flare-up or asthma attack): acute or sub-acute (sudden or gradual) worsening 
in symptoms (shortness of breath, cough, wheezing, or chest tightness) and lung function, compared with the person’s 
usual condition. Exacerbations are often triggered by viral upper respiratory tract infection, exposure to pollen or pollution, 
or poor adherence to ICS treatment, but they can also occur in people without any of these risk factors. Severe
exacerbations can be fatal, even in people with infrequent symptoms. The risk of severe exacerbations is greatly reduced 
by taking ICS-containing treatment.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 7 ---

7
ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; PEF: peak expiratory flow. Box numbers refer to the full 2025 GINA Report.
FIGURE 1. Diagnosing asthma in clinical practice (adults, adolescents and children 6–11 years)
Detailed history & examination
Do history & examination 
support diagnosis of asthma?
Is spirometry or PEF  
available? 
Review response in  
1-3 months, including PEF  
or spirometry if available
Have symptoms (and 
lung function if available) 
improved?
Further history and tests for 
alternative diagnoses
Is alternative diagnosis 
confirmed?
Perform lung function  
test(s), e.g. spirometry or  
PEF before and after 
bronchodilator (Box 1-2)
Is variable expiratory  
airflow confirmed?
Repeat during 
symptoms 
or consider 
additional tests 
(Box 1-2)
Patient with chronic or  
recurrent respiratory symptoms
Are the symptoms typical  
of asthma?
Treat for asthma with  
ICS-containing treatment  
(Boxes 4-5 & 4-11)
Treat for alternative  
diagnosis
Refer for higher  
level advice
If other diagnoses are  
unlikely, treat empirically with 
ICS-containing treatment  
(Boxes 4-5 & 4-11)
Consider  
biomarkers*
Is the patient already  
taking ICS treatment? 
See Boxes 1-3 and 1-4  
for diagnostic approach in 
patients already on ICS
Does the patient have  
severely uncontrolled 
respiratory symptoms/ 
signs? 
 Treat as exacerbation  
(Box 9-4)  
**In a patient with typical asthma symptoms, elevated FeNO or elevated blood eosinophils can 
support a diagnosis of Type 2 asthma. Lower levels do not rule out asthma.
Investigations Treatment
YES
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
YES
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 8 ---

8
TABLE 1. Criteria for initial diagnosis of asthma in adults (≥18 years) and children (6–17 years)
1. A history of variable respiratory symptoms
Typical asthma symptoms are wheeze, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and/or cough.
These features support the diagnosis of asthma:
• The person’s symptoms vary in frequency and intensity
.
• Symptoms often occur or worsen at night or when the person wakes up.
• Symptoms are often triggered by exercise, laughter, allergens, or cold air.
• Symptoms worsen after exertion (very distinctive).
• Symptoms often occur or worsen when the person has a viral respiratory infection.
2. Evidence of variable expiratory airflow
Any of these features indicates excessive variability in expiratory lung function:
• Significant bronchodilator responsiveness (also called reversibility) measured with spirometry by
comparing FEV1 before and after inhaled bronchodilator(a) (or PEF if spirometry not available)(b) (d)
Adults: FEV1 or FVC increases by ≥12% and by ≥200 mL from the pre-bronchodilator value (or PEF increases by ≥20%)
Children: FEV1 increases by ≥12% of the predicted value (or PEF increases by ≥15%)
• Excessive average daily variability in PEF over 2 weeks(c)
Adults: >10%
Children: >13%
• Significant response to ICS treatment for 4 weeks
Adults: FEV1 or FVC increases by ≥12% and by ≥200 mL (or PEF increases by ≥20%(b)) from measurements recorded
before ICS treatment started
Children: FEV1 increases by ≥12% of the predicted value (or PEF increases by ≥15%)(b)
• Positive bronchial challenge test(e)
• Excessive variation in lung function between visits(f)
Adults: FEV1 changes between visits by ≥12% and by ≥200 mL (or PEF(g) by ≥20%)
Children: FEV1 changes between visits by ≥12% (or PEF by ≥15%)(g)
FEV1: forced expiratory volume in 1 second measured by spirometry; FVC: forced vital capacity measured by spirometry; PEF: peak expiratory flow.
Notes:
a. Measure change by comparing spirometry 10–15 minutes before and after 200-400 mcg salbutamol (albuterol). Responsiveness is more likely to be significant if 
bronchodilators are withheld before test. Recommended withholding periods are on page 9.
b. PEF is less reliable than spirometry, but can be used if spirometry is not available.
c.  To calculate average daily variability:
1. Measure PEF morning and night for 1–2 weeks using same PEF meter (each time, measure PEF 3 times and record only the highest).
2. Calculate daily variability each day: (difference between morning and evening PEF) divided by ([morning PEF plus evening PEF] divided by 2).
3.  Add daily variability scores for all days and divide by number of days.
An online PEF variability calculator is available: https://www.asthmaandlung.org.uk/healthcare-professionals/adult-asthma/diagnosis-testing/perf-calc
d. In a person with asthma, bronchodilator response may not be present during a viral respiratory infection.
e. Standardized challenge with methacholine, hyperventilation, hypertonic saline, mannitol, or exercise
f. Good specificity but poor sensitivity for the diagnosis of asthma
g. Use the same peak flow meter and record highest of three readings each time.
Role of Type 2 biomarkers in diagnosis of asthma 
In patients with typical asthma symptoms, if spirometry or PEF is not available or testing is negative, elevated FeNO 
(adults/adolescents: >50 ppb; children: >35 ppb) or blood eosinophils above national/regional reference range can 
support the diagnosis of Type 2 asthma, but can also be due to non-asthma conditions. Lower levels of FeNO or blood 
eosinophils do not rule out asthma. FeNO and blood eosinophils vary substantially by sex, age and (for FeNO) device 
and site). Blood eosinophils are higher in the morning, and FeNO is lower in the morning. See Appendix A in full 2025 
GINA Report.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 9 ---

9
A previous diagnosis of asthma should be confirmed 
In primary care, many patients (25–35%) with a diagnosis of asthma may not actually have asthma. If the criteria for 
asthma (Table 1) have not already been recorded, the patient’s asthma diagnosis should be confirmed by objective tests. 
If the patient does not show variable expiratory airflow, consider other investigations. For example, if lung function is 
normal, repeat the bronchodilator response test when the patient has symptoms, or after stopping bronchodilators, such 
as SABA or long-acting beta
2-agonist (LABA), for the following times before the test (if safe):
 • No short-acting beta2-agonist (SABA) for more than 4 hours
 • No ICS-LABA combination for more than 24 hours, if prescribed for twice daily use (e.g. ICS-formoterol,
   ICS-salmeterol)
 • No ICS-LABA combination for more than 36 hours, if prescribed for once daily use (e.g. ICS-vilanterol,
   ICS-indacaterol)
 • No long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) for 36–48 hours.
How to confirm the diagnosis of asthma in patients taking ICS 
If the patient is already taking medication that contains ICS and has frequent symptoms, and their lung function is less 
than 70% predicted, consider increasing treatment to the next step (pages 22 and 30), then measure lung function again
3 months later. If symptoms and lung function improve, this confirms the diagnosis of asthma. 
If the patient has few symptoms and their lung function is greater than 70% predicted, consider stepping down
ICS-containing treatment before measuring lung function again. Ensure that the patient has a written asthma action plan 
(page 21) and monitor asthma carefully.
For more information about confirming the diagnosis of asthma, see full 2025 GINA Report Box 1-4 and Box 1-5.
Diagnosing asthma in specific populations 
Patients with persistent cough but no other respiratory symptoms: In some children and adults, cough may be the 
only symptom of asthma, and the patient may not have bronchodilator responsiveness. Cough-variant asthma is
characterized by cough and airway hyperresponsiveness detected by bronchial provocation testing. It should be treated 
with ICS-containing medication, like other asthma phenotypes. Other common causes of persistent dry cough include 
chronic upper airway cough syndrome (‘postnasal drip’), chronic sinusitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), 
treatment with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, inducible laryngeal obstruction (often called vocal cord 
dysfunction), and eosinophilic bronchitis.
Occupational asthma and work-aggravated (work-exacerbated) asthma: If a patient’s asthma started in adulthood, 
ask if there are allergens or irritants in the air at work or at home, and whether their asthma is better when they are away 
from these places. The diagnosis must be confirmed with objective tests. The patient should be referred to a specialist (if 
available) without delay. The cause must be identified, and the patient’s exposure to the cause must be stopped immediately.
Pregnant women: Ask all pregnant women, and those planning pregnancy, whether they have asthma. Advise pregnant 
women with asthma that it is important to use ICS-containing treatment during pregnancy for their baby’s health, as well 
as their own health. If the diagnosis of asthma has not been objectively confirmed, start or continue ICS-containing
treatment, and wait until after delivery to confirm the diagnosis. Do not stop or reduce ICS-containing treatment, and do 
not do bronchial provocation testing during pregnancy.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 10 ---

10
Older adults: Asthma may be under-diagnosed in older adults due to poor perception of airflow limitation, the belief that 
breathlessness is normal in old age, lack of fitness, or reduced activity. Breathlessness due to heart failure or ischemic 
heart disease can also be mistakenly attributed to asthma. If patients have a history of smoking or exposure to biomass 
fuel, consider the possibility of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) as a co-occurring or alternative diagnosis.
Patients with persistent airflow limitation: If a patient has airflow limitation that does not respond to bronchodilator 
(Table 1), try to distinguish between asthma with persistent airflow limitation and COPD, by analyzing their medical history, 
pattern of symptoms, and past medical records. If a patient has clinical features consistent with both asthma and COPD, 
or the diagnosis is uncertain, refer them to a specialist.
COPD: Patients can have asthma and COPD at the same time. This is called “asthma+COPD” or “asthma-COPD
overlap”. It is more common among smokers and the elderly. Asthma+COPD is not a specific disease and probably has 
several causes. Asthma+COPD has worse outcomes than asthma or COPD alone.
Patients with a diagnosis of COPD who also have asthma (or a history of asthma) should be treated with ICS-containing 
treatment. Their risk of hospitalization or death is higher if they receive only bronchodilators.
Diagnosis of asthma in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs): In some LMICs the differential diagnosis of 
asthma often includes other endemic respiratory disease such as tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS-associated lung diseases, and 
parasitic or fungal lung diseases. Practical strategies for asthma diagnosis, based on history and clinical findings, have 
been developed and tested in LMICs. These are less precise than diagnosis based on spirometry, but they help identify 
patients with probable asthma who need treatment.
If spirometry is unavailable or unaffordable, peak expiratory flow (PEF) meters can be used to detect variable expiratory 
airflow to confirm the diagnosis of asthma (Figure 1, Table 1, pages 7 & 8). To avoid underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis 
of asthma in LMICs, health workers need much greater access to spirometry and PEF meters, and need training to use 
them.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE