

--- PAGE 34 ---

34
Note: Patients whose maintenance treatment is ICS-LABA with a non-formoterol LABA should not use ICS-formoterol as 
their reliever; they should instead use SABA or ICS-SABA as their reliever.
For patients using ICS-SABA reliever (adults/adolescents using Track 2 treatment): advise the patient to take extra 
doses of ICS-SABA (2 inhalations of budesonide-salbutamol 100/100 mcg [delivered dose 80/90 mcg] each time) for 
symptom relief, and continue their usual maintenance ICS-containing treatment. They should get medical care if they are 
rapidly deteriorating, or are not improving after 2–3 days, or if they need ICS-SABA more than 6 times in any day.
Patients using SABA reliever (adults/adolescents using Track 2 treatment, and children 6–11 years): advise the patient 
to take SABA when needed for symptom relief, and to increase their ICS-containing maintenance treatment (if prescribed) 
for at least 1–2 weeks. For adults, consider increasing maintenance ICS dose to 4 times usual dose for 1–2 weeks. 
The patient should get medical care if they need SABA again within 3 hours, or if asthma symptoms are worsening rapidly 
or are not improving. 
Use of oral corticosteroids in written asthma action plans 
For most adults and adolescents, the written asthma action plan should give instructions for when and how to start oral 
corticosteroid treatment, and whether to contact the doctor first. A short course of oral corticosteroid is often used if:
• Asthma symptoms are getting worse over 2–3 days, despite using more reliever
• Asthma symptoms are rapidly getting worse
• Lung function is low (FEV1 <60% of predicted value, PEF <60% of personal best)
• Symptoms are worsening in person with a history of sudden severe exacerbations.
Usual doses are:
• Adults: prednisolone 40–50 mg each morning for 5–7 days
• Children: prednisolone 1–2 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg, each morning for 3–5 days.
If an oral corticosteroid is used for less than 2 weeks, it is not necessary to reduce the dose at the end of treatment before 
stopping it.
If patients are provided with a prescription for oral corticosteroids for use as part of their asthma action plan, they should 
be told to contact their doctor if they start taking the medications. Advise patients about common side-effects, including 
sleep disturbance, increased appetite, reflux, and mood changes. 
Oral corticosteroids can be life-saving during severe asthma exacerbations, but there is more and more evidence that the 
risk of side-effects increases with each course. The need for courses of oral corticosteroids can be reduced by optimizing 
inhaled therapy
, including attention to inhaler technique and adherence, and by switching to Track 1 therapy with
ICS-formoterol, if available.
Managing exacerbations in primary or acute care 
Figure 9 (page 36) summarizes assessment and management of asthma exacerbations in adults, adolescents and 
children 6–11 years in primary care.
Assess severity of the exacerbation while starting SABA and oxygen (if needed): check for anaphylaxis and assess 
dyspnea, respiratory rate, pulse rate, oxygen saturation* and lung function (for example, PEF).
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 35 ---

35
Consider alternative causes of acute breathlessness (for example, heart failure, upper airway dysfunction, inhaled
foreign body, pulmonary embolism).
Arrange immediate transfer to an acute care facility if there are signs of severe exacerbation (see Figure 9).
Immediately give inhaled SABA, inhaled ipratropium bromide, oxygen and systemic corticosteroids. Transfer to intensive 
care if the patient is drowsy, confused, or has a silent chest.
*Pulse oximetry may overestimate oxygen saturation in a hypoxemic patient with dark skin color. Oxygen saturation targets should be
adjusted for altitude, where appropriate.
Start bronchodilator treatment with repeated doses of SABA (usually by pressurized metered-dose inhaler and spacer) 
and controlled flow oxygen, if needed and available. Inhaled albuterol (salbutamol) is the most common bronchodilator 
used to treat acute asthma. High-dose budesonide-formoterol was as effective and safe as high-dose salbutamol in
studies in patients with FEV
1 >30% predicted treated in emergency departments. In acute care facilities, consider
intravenous magnesium sulfate if the patient has an inadequate response to intensive initial treatment.
Start oral corticosteroids (except for mild exacerbations): Adults: prednisolone 40–50 mg each morning for 5–7 days. 
Children: prednisolone 1–2 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg, each morning for 3–5 days. See the full 2025 GINA Report for other
corticosteroid options.
Titrate oxygen, if needed, to maintain target saturation of 93–95%* in adults and adolescents (≥ 94%* in children
6–12 years).
Do not routinely perform chest X-ray or blood gases, or routinely prescribe antibiotics. 
Do not use sedatives.
Monitor closely: Check symptoms and oxygen saturation frequently. Measure lung function after 1 hour. Titrate treatment 
according to response. Transfer to higher-level care if patient’s condition worsens or symptoms fail to respond.
Decide whether to hospitalize the patient based on clinical status, symptoms and lung function, response to treatment, 
recent and history of exacerbations, and their ability to manage at home.
Before discharge, arrange ongoing treatment to reduce the chance of another exacerbation:
• Prescribe regular maintenance treatment that includes ICS: For adults and adolescents, the preferred
treatment is ICS-formoterol MART
, if available. If not, prescribe regular daily medium-dose ICS-LABA.
For children 6–11 years, the treatment options are low-dose ICS-LABA
 plus SABA as needed, medium-dose ICS
plus SABA as needed, or MART
. See Table 7 for MART doses for adults and children, and see Table 6 for low,
medium and high-dose ICS if used with as-needed SABA.
•Reduce reliever use to as-needed: tell patient (or parent/caregiver) to use reliever only as needed for
symptoms (not regularly), so they can tell if asthma is worsening or improving.
• Check inhaler technique and adherence.
• Provide an interim written asthma action plan.
Arrange follow-up: if possible, within 2–7 days for adults and adolescents, and within 1–2 working days for children. 
Consider early referral for specialist advice after hospitalization, or for patients with repeated emergency visits for asthma.
*Pulse oximetry may overestimate oxygen saturation in a hypoxemic patient with dark skin color. Oxygen saturation targets should be
adjusted for altitude, where appropriate.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 36 ---

36
FIGURE 9. Management of asthma exacerbations in primary care
ICS: inhaled corticosteroid; PEF: peak expiratory flow; O2: oxygen; pMDI: pressurized metered-dose inhaler; SABA: short-acting
beta2-agonist (doses are for salbutamol [albuterol] 100 mcg/actuation).
IMPROVING
TRANSFER TO ACUTE 
CARE FACILITY
 While waiting: give SABA, 
ipratropium bromide,  
O2, systemic corticosteroid
 ASSESS RESPONSE AT 1 HOUR (or earlier) 
CONTINUE TREATMENT with SABA as needed
MILD or MODERATE
Talks in phrases, prefers  
sitting to lying, not agitated
Respiratory rate increased
Accessory muscles not used
Pulse rate 100–120 bpm
O
2 saturation (on air) 90–95%
PEF >50% predicted or best
START TREATMENT
SABA 4–10 puffs by pMDI + spacer,  
every 20 minutes for 3 doses, if needed
Prednisolone for moderate 
exacerbation: adults 40-50 mg, 
children 1–2 mg/kg, max. 40 mg
Controlled oxygen (if available): target 
saturation 93–95% (children: ≥94%)
FOLLOW UP UP within 2–7 days (1–3 days for children) 
Review symptoms and signs: Is the exacerbation resolving? Should prednisone be continued?
Reliever: as-needed, not regular 
ICS-containing controller: confirm patient is taking ICS-containing medication. Check inhaler technique  
and adherence. Adults/adolescents: switch to GINA Track 1 with ICS-formoterol if available (Box 4-6, Box 9-5)
Risk factors: check and correct modifiable risk factors that may have contributed to exacerbation 
Refer for expert advice if more than 1 exacerbation in a year
Action plan: Is it understood? Was it used appropriately? Does it need to be modified?
ASSESS FOR DISCHARGE
Symptoms improved, not needing SABA
PEF improving, and >60-80% of personal 
best or predicted
Oxygen saturation >94% room air
Resources at home adequate
SEVERE
Talks in words, sits hunched 
forwards, agitated
Respiratory rate >30/min
Accessory muscles in use
Pulse rate >120 bpm
O
2 saturation (on air) <90%
PEF ≤50% predicted or best
Patient presents with acute or sub-acute worsening of asthmaPRIMARY CARE  
ASSESS the PATIENT
Are the current symptoms due to asthma? Consider other causes
Risk factors for asthma-related death?
Severity of exacerbation? (consider worst feature)
LIFE-THREATENING
Drowsy, confused 
or quiet chest
ARRANGE at DISCHARGE
Reliever: as needed, not regularly
Controller: start, or step up ICS therapy (Track 1 
preferred). Check inhaler technique, adherence
Prednisolone: continue, usually total 5–7 days 
(3–5 days for children). See text for other options.
Follow up: within 2–7 days (1–3 working days 
for children)
URGENT
WORSENING
WORSENING
IMPROVING
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 37 ---

37
Follow-up after an exacerbation 
All patients must be followed up regularly by a healthcare provider until symptoms and lung function return to normal.
Reassess long-term treatment. For adults and adolescents, consider changing to Track 1 (page 24) with ICS-formoterol 
reliever to reduce the risk of another exacerbation. Check adherence to ICS containing medications. Make sure the
patient/parent/caregiver understands the purposes of asthma medications, and check if they are using the inhaler
correctly. Review the written asthma action plan.
Ask what the patient/parent/caregiver thinks may have caused the exacerbation. Check risk factors for exacerbations, 
such as smoking, allergen exposure, regular use or over-use of SABA (see Table 2).
Consider referring patients for expert advice after hospitalization for severe asthma or recurring acute asthma.
Refer patients who have had more than 1 or 2 exacerbations/year despite medium-dose or high-dose ICS-LABA.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE