

--- PAGE 15 ---

15
Managing asthma: general principles
The long-term goals of asthma management are to control symptoms (long-term, not just in recent days/weeks) and to 
prevent exacerbations, airway damage, and medication side-effects. The aim is to achieve the best possible outcomes 
for the patient. Also ask the patient about their own goals and preferences for their asthma treatment.
Children with pre-school wheezing often have clinical remission of these symptoms, off treatment, by school-age or 
adolescence, but this does not mean it is cured, as it often recurs. Risk factors for persistence of childhood asthma 
include allergy features, a family history of asthma or allergy, later onset of symptoms, wheezing without colds, and 
maternal smoking or tobacco smoke exposure.
Some patients with severe asthma demonstrate clinical remission while taking biologic therapy. Predictors of remission 
in these patients include fewer symptoms, better lung function, little multimorbidity, earlier asthma onset, and no or lower 
maintenance OCS use at baseline.
Essential asthma medicines 
Make sure that every patient’s medication includes ICS (or a combination medication that contains ICS) to reduce 
their risk of serious exacerbations, even if symptoms are infrequent (see page 23 for options in adults and adolescents 
and page 29 for options in children 6–11 years).
ICS-containing medication should be started as soon as possible after diagnosis, for these reasons: 
• Any patient can have severe exacerbations, even those whose asthma seems to be mild.
• ICS-containing medication markedly reduces risk of asthma hospitalizations and death. It is very effective in
preventing severe exacerbations, reducing symptoms, improving lung function, and preventing exercise-induced
bronchoconstriction, even in patients with mild asthma.
• Early treatment with low-dose ICS is associated with better lung function than starting when symptoms have
been present for more than 2–4 years.
• Patients who have a severe exacerbation when not taking ICS have worse long-term lung function than those
who have started ICS.
Every patient needs a reliever containing a rapid-acting bronchodilator to use whenever they have asthma symptoms. 
The reliever can be either ICS-formoterol, ICS-SABA or SABA. Low-dose ICS-formoterol is the preferred reliever for 
adolescents and adults, because it reduces the risk of severe exacerbations, compared with treatment regimens with 
SABA reliever (see 
page 23 for options in adults and adolescents and page 29 for options in children 6–11 years).
For safety, GINA recommends that asthma should not be treated solely with as-needed SABA. Most patients with 
asthma have airway inflammation, even if they have only intermittent or infrequent symptoms. SABA-only treatment is 
associated with increased risk of exacerbations, worse lung function, and increased risk of death due to asthma. Regular 
use of SABA increases allergic responses and airway inflammation, and reduces the bronchodilator response to SABA. 
Over-use of SABA (for example, ≥3 x 200-dose canisters dispensed in a year) is associated with an increased risk of 
severe exacerbations compared, with 0–2 canisters. Dispensing of ≥12 SABA canisters (possibly less) in a year is 
associated with increased risk of death due to asthma. Home use of nebulized SABA is also associated with an increased 
risk of asthma death.
For more information on asthma medicines see the list of asthma medication classes and medicines on page 38.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 16 ---

16
Principles of selecting treatment 
There are different treatment recommendations for adults/adolescents (page 23) and children aged 6–11 years (page 29). 
See the full 2025 GINA Report for recommendations about children aged 5 years and younger.
For each age group, GINA provides “preferred” treatment options and “alternative” treatment options. Preferred asthma 
treatments are the treatments that were most effective in clinical trials, particularly for reducing exacerbations, and/or are 
more convenient for patients.
To choose the best treatment for an individual patient, also consider their risk factors, their other medical conditions, 
the type of asthma they have, their personal goals for their asthma treatment, their ability to use different types of inhalers 
correctly, whether they are likely to adhere to treatment, the cost of medication, and its environmental impact.
GINA treatment options for each age group are shown as “steps”. The step number indicates a level of intensity: Step 5 
has more medicines and higher doses than Step 1. Treatment can be stepped down or up.
Principles of choosing and using inhalers 
Inhaled medicines are essential for effective asthma management. Make sure each patient uses their inhaler effectively
. 
Incorrect use is very common. It contributes to poor symptom control and exacerbations, and increases the risk of local 
adverse effects. 
Choose the medication and the most appropriate device for the patient before prescribing (Figure 3). Consider physical 
problems such as arthritis, the patient’s skills, and cost. Patients using ICS in a pressurized metered-dose inhaler should 
use a spacer. If more than one type of inhaler is available for the preferred treatment, and the patient can use these 
inhalers equally well, discuss their relative environmental impact with the patient (see Figure 3).
Train patients to use inhalers correctly. Obtain a checklist for each type of inhaler you prescribe, and learn the correct 
technique so you can show patients.
Check inhaler technique at every opportunity. Ask the patient to show you how they use the inhaler, and use a checklist 
for the specific device to identify any errors.
Correct errors by physically demonstrating the correct technique, paying attention to incorrect steps. Check the patient’s 
technique again, up to 2–3 times if necessary.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 17 ---

17
FIGURE 3. Choosing the best inhaler with the patient
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 18 ---

18
Assess, adjust treatment, review response 
To minimize risk and control symptoms, assess each patient’s asthma, adjust their treatment, and review the response. 
Repeat this cycle continuously (Figure 4).
Asthma control can change, so ICS-containing treatment is periodically adjusted by the healthcare provider or patient/
parent/caregiver. Treatment can be increased day-to-day, short term or for several months. Treatment can be reduced 
when good asthma control has been achieved and maintained for 2–3 months (see page 27 and page 31). 
Every time the treatment is changed, reassess symptom control, exacerbations, side-effects, and lung function, and ask 
the patient (or parent/caregiver) if they are satisfied with their treatment.
In general, asthma should be reviewed 1–3 months after starting treatment, then every 3–12 months (every 4–6 weeks 
during pregnancy). After an exacerbation, review within 1 week. The frequency of review also depends on the patient’s 
previous symptom control, their risk factors, their response to initial treatment, and their ability and willingness to manage 
asthma using an action plan.
Review asthma frequently if a patient has risk factors for a fatal exacerbation, such as other relevant medical conditions, 
previous near-fatal asthma (ever), a very severe exacerbation in the last year, currently using or recently stopped oral 
corticosteroids, over-use of SABA, especially if dispensed more than 1 canister (200 doses) per month. If FeNO is high, 
check and correct adherence and inhaler technique first, before considering step-up in asthma treatment
FIGURE 4. The asthma management cycle of shared decision-making
Confirmation of diagnosis if necessary
Symptom control & modifiable 
risk factors
Comorbidities
Inhaler technique & adherence
Patient (and parent/caregiver) 
preferences and goals
Treatment of modifiable risk factors 
and comorbidities
Non-pharmacological strategies 
Asthma medications including ICS
Education & skills training, action plan
Symptoms 
Exacerbations
Side-effects
Comorbidities
Lung function
Consider biomarkers
Patient (and parent/caregiver) 
satisfaction
ASSESS
ADJUST
REVIEW
ICS: inhaled corticosteroids
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 19 ---

19
Managing risk factors 
Treat risk factors (Table 2, page 12), including other medical conditions that interfere with asthma or asthma treatment.
There is consistent, high-quality evidence that these strategies can reduce the risk of exacerbations:
 • Guided self-management
. Teach patients to monitor their symptoms and/or PEF, give them a written asthma  
 
   action plan (page 21), and review asthma regularly.
 • T
reatment regimens that include ICS. For all patients, prescribe treatment that includes ICS. This includes 
               ICS-formoterol taken as needed for asthma symptoms, ICS taken every day, or combination ICS-LABA taken
   every day (see options for adults/adolescents on pages 24–25 and options for children on page 29). For adults  
 
   and adolescents, GINA 
Track 1 with ICS-formoterol reliever (page 24) reduces the risk of severe exacerbations,  
 
   compared with using a SABA reliever
.
 • A
voiding tobacco smoke. Advise and help patients to quit smoking/vaping, and to avoid other people’s smoke/ 
 
   vapes. Advise parents not to smoke or vape in rooms or cars that children use. 
 • Management of confirmed food allergy. 
Advise appropriate food avoidance and ensure patient has injectable  
 
   epinephrine for anaphylaxis.
 • Referral to a specialist center. If available, refer patients with severe asthma for detailed assessment and
   consideration of add-on biologic medications and/or sputum-guided treatment.
 • School-based programs
 that include asthma self-management skills.
Non-pharmacological treatment 
In addition to medications, other therapies and strategies may help control symptoms and reduce risk (see the full 2025 
GINA Report for details).
There is consistent, high-quality evidence to support some strategies, for example:
 • Advice about smoking cessation
. At every visit, strongly encourage smokers to quit. Provide access to
   counselling and resources. 
Advise parents/caregivers not to smoke in rooms or cars used by children with asthma. 
 • Physical activity
. Encourage people with asthma to do regular physical activity for its general health benefits; it  
 
   may also slightly improve asthma control and lung function. 
Advise patients how to manage exercise-induced
   bronchoconstriction.
 • Investigation for occupational asthma. 
Ask all patients with adult-onset asthma about their work history.
   Identify sensitizers in the workplace and remove them as soon as possible. Refer for expert advice, if available.
 • Managing aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease. 
Always ask about previous reactions before prescribing
   nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, including aspirin.
Allergens may contribute 
to asthma symptoms in sensitized patients, but allergen avoidance is not recommended for other 
people with asthma. Allergen avoidance strategies are often complex and expensive, and there are no validated methods 
for identifying those who are likely to benefit.
Some common triggers for asthma symptoms, such as exercise and laughter, should not be avoided. Others, such as viral 
respiratory infections and stress, are difficult to avoid and must be managed when they occur.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 20 ---

20
Check and improve adherence to asthma treatment 
Many patients do not take their asthma medications as prescribed. Poor adherence may be unintentional (for example, 
due to forgetfulness, cost, or misunderstanding) and/or intentional (for example, due to belief that the medicine is
unnecessary, fear of side-effects, cultural issues, or cost).
If ICS-containing maintenance treatment is prescribed but the patient does not take it regularly, they may be using only 
SABA reliever. SABA-only treatment results in poor symptom control and increases the risk of exacerbations.
Identify patients with adherence problems:
 • Show empathy when asking patients about their treatment use, for example: “Most patients don’t take their
   inhaler exactly as prescribed. In the last 4 weeks, how many days a week have you been taking it? 0 days a  
 
	 		week,	or	1,	or	2	days	…?”,	or	“Do	you	find	it	easier	to	remember	your	inhaler	in	the	morning	or	night?” 
 • Check medication usage, from prescription date, inhaler date/dose counter, dispensing records.
 • Ask patients about their attitudes and beliefs about asthma and medications
. 
 • Check adherence if FeNO is high despite prescription of GINA Step 3 or Step 4 treatment.
Studies have shown improved adherence with these strategies:
 • Shared decision-making for medication and dose choice
 • Electronic inhaler reminders for missed doses
 • Comprehensive asthma education with home visits by asthma nurses
 • Healthcare providers reviewing feedback about their patients’ dispensing records
 • An automated voice recognition program with telephone messages triggered when refills are due or overdue
 • Direct observation of children taking maintenance asthma treatment at school.
Educate patients and caregivers about asthma 
Give patients, parents and caregivers information that they can understand clearly.
Explain:
 • Why they need long-term treatment for asthma
 • How to use the inhaler correctly
 • How to use their written asthma action plan
 • How to monitor symptoms and/or peak flow
 • Why they need regular medical review for asthma.
To manage asthma ef
fectively, health providers and patients need to work together. When healthcare providers are trained 
to communicate well, patients with asthma may be more satisfied with their health care, be less restricted by their asthma, 
and have fewer emergency visits for asthma.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE