

--- PAGE 5 ---

5
Introduction
Asthma is a serious global health problem.
Approximately 300 million people around the world have asthma. It is becoming more prevalent in many economically 
developing countries.
Asthma is a growing problem for patients, communities and healthcare systems. It interferes with people’s work, education 
and family life, especially when children have asthma. Around the world, asthma still kills people, including young people. 
Approximately 96% of people who die from asthma are in low-income or middle-income countries.
The Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) was established to increase awareness about asthma among healthcare
providers, public health authorities and communities, to improve medical care for people with asthma, and to help prevent 
asthma. GINA works with many people around the world to achieve these goals. GINA contributors are listed on page 46.
GINA publishes information and recommendations on asthma care, based on the latest medical evidence.
GINA also promotes international collaboration on asthma research.
The Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention (the GINA Report) provides comprehensive information 
on asthma management, which can be adapted for local healthcare systems and for individual patients. It is based on 
strong scientific evidence and provides practical advice for healthcare providers. The GINA Report is updated every year, 
based on a systematic review of new medical evidence (original research and systematic reviews).
 
The full 2025 GINA Report and other resources are available from ginasthma.org/reports.
Asthma Facts
Asthma is a common chronic (long-term) disease. It causes respiratory symptoms and can restrict people’s activity. 
Many people with asthma have infrequent symptoms, but some have frequent or severe symptoms. Asthma can be a 
substantial problem for families and communities.
Asthma can be serious. People with asthma can have exacerbations (also called flare-ups or asthma attacks), which 
can be mild or severe. Severe asthma exacerbations require urgent health care and can cause death. 
Asthma can be treated effectively. Most patients can achieve good long-term control of their asthma with treatment 
that includes inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). ‘Well-controlled asthma’ means that the person does not have severe asthma 
exacerbations, they do not have troublesome asthma symptoms during the day or night, they have normal lung function or 
almost normal lung function, and they are able to lead active lives, including exercise.
All adults, adolescents and children aged 6–11 years should receive treatment that includes ICS. These medicines 
greatly reduce the frequency and severity of asthma symptoms, the risk of exacerbations, and the risk of death from
asthma.
Asthma treatment should be carefully selected for each patient. Healthcare providers should consider each person’s 
level of symptom control, their risk factors for exacerbations, and their type of asthma (‘phenotype’). They should also
consider the effectiveness and safety of the available medications, the cost to the payer or patient, whether the patient 
can use the inhaler correctly, and the environmental impact. If more than one suitable inhaler is available, the patient 
should participate in choosing. (see pages 16–17)
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 6 ---

6
Diagnosing Asthma
Asthma has two defining features (Figure 1, Table 1) : 
 • A
 history of typical respiratory symptoms that are variable, meaning that they are sometimes more frequent and  
 
   more severe than at other times, AND
 • Variable expiratory airflow
. However, in people with asthma for many years, airflow limitation may become  
 
   permanent.
Symptoms can include wheeze, difficult breathing, a feeling of tightness in the chest, and cough.
Physical examination is often normal. Wheezing may be heard, especially during forced expiration.
The diagnosis of asthma should be confirmed, and the evidence should be documented in the patient's medical
record. T
o confirm the diagnosis of asthma, there should be a history of typical variable respiratory symptoms and
evidence of variable expiratory airflow (current or previous). If patients are already taking ICS treatment, additional tests 
may be needed to confirm the diagnosis of asthma (see page 9 and GINA 2025 Box 1-4).
Definitions
Asthma: a chronic (long-term) respiratory disease with many variations (phenotypes), usually characterized by chronic 
airway inflammation. Asthma causes respiratory symptoms that get better or worse at different times. Symptoms include
wheezing, difficult breathing, chest tightness and cough. These symptoms can be mild or severe, frequent or infrequent. 
When a person with asthma has symptoms, the flow of air out of their lungs is reduced. It is difficult to breathe out
because the airways become narrower (bronchoconstriction), the airway walls become thicker, and there is more mucus. 
In people with untreated asthma, expiratory airflow decreases more often and much more than in people without asthma.
Triggers: anything that can cause asthma symptoms, or make symptoms worse. Triggers include viral respiratory
infections, allergens in the air at home or work (for example, house dust mite, pets, pollens, or cockroach particles),
tobacco smoke or vaping, exercise, and stress. These are more likely to cause asthma symptoms when asthma is not 
already controlled by treatment. Some medicines (for example, beta-blockers) can cause asthma symptoms or
exacerbations. In some patients, aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs cause asthma symptoms or
exacerbations.
Asthma exacerbation (also called asthma flare-up or asthma attack): acute or sub-acute (sudden or gradual) worsening 
in symptoms (shortness of breath, cough, wheezing, or chest tightness) and lung function, compared with the person’s 
usual condition. Exacerbations are often triggered by viral upper respiratory tract infection, exposure to pollen or pollution, 
or poor adherence to ICS treatment, but they can also occur in people without any of these risk factors. Severe
exacerbations can be fatal, even in people with infrequent symptoms. The risk of severe exacerbations is greatly reduced 
by taking ICS-containing treatment.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE