

--- PAGE 32 ---

32
Allergic rhinitis and chronic rhinosinusitis 
Allergic rhinitis is very common among people with asthma. It should be treated with intranasal corticosteroids as well as 
treating asthma.
Chronic rhinosinusitis, especially if associated with nasal polyps, is associated with more severe asthma. Treatment of 
allergic rhinitis or chronic rhinosinusitis reduces nasal symptoms, but may not improve asthma control. Some biologic 
treatments (anti-immunoglobulin E, anti-interleukin 4 receptor alpha, anti-interleukin 5, and anti-interleukin 5 receptor
alpha) improve nasal symptoms in patients with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps and asthma (see the full 2025 
GINA Report).
Obesity 
Asthma is more difficult to control in people with obesity. Include weight reduction in the treatment plan for obese patients 
with asthma; even 5–10% weight loss can improve asthma control.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) 
Asymptomatic GERD is unlikely to cause poor asthma control. Symptomatic reflux should be treated, but patients with 
poorly controlled asthma should not be treated with anti-reflux therapy unless they also have symptomatic reflux.
The elderly 
Comorbidities and their treatment may complicate asthma management. Consider all other medicines the person is
taking, and check for side-effects. When choosing medications and inhaler devices, consider factors like arthritis,
eyesight, inspiratory flow, and complexity of treatment regimens, and the environmental impact of the inhaler.
Aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) 
A history of asthma exacerbation after taking aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) strongly 
suggests AERD. Patients with AERD often have severe asthma and nasal polyposis. If the history clearly suggests AERD, 
advise the patient to avoid all nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Challenge testing can confirm the diagnosis, but this 
should only be done in a specialized center with resuscitation facilities. In some patients, addition of a leukotriene receptor 
antagonist to ICS-containing treatment improves lung function and reduces symptoms. (Note: there are concerns about 
risk of neuropsychiatric side effects with montelukast.) Desensitization is sometimes effective, but this must only be done 
under specialist care; there is a significantly increased risk of adverse effects such as asthma exacerbation, gastritis and 
gastrointestinal bleeding.
Food allergy and anaphylaxis 
Food allergy may cause anaphylaxis but is rarely a trigger for asthma symptoms. Food allergy must be assessed by
specialist testing, because confirmed food allergy is a risk factor for asthma-related death. Good asthma control is
essential. Ensure patients (and parents/caregivers) have an anaphylaxis plan, know how to avoid the allergen, and know 
how to use injectable epinephrine.
Surgery in patients with asthma  
If possible, surgery should be done when the patient has good asthma control. Ensure that ICS-containing treatment is 
continued throughout the peri-operative period. For patients on long-term high-dose ICS, and patients who have used oral 
corticosteroids for more than 2 weeks in the previous 6 months, hydrocortisone should be administered during the
operation to reduce the risk of adrenal crisis.
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE

--- PAGE 33 ---

33
COVID-19 and other respiratory viral infections 
People with well-controlled asthma do not have a higher risk of severe COVID-19 or COVID-19-related death than the 
general population. However, people with severe asthma exacerbations (people who recently needed oral corticosteroids 
for asthma, and people hospitalized with severe asthma) have a higher risk of death due to COVID-19.
When COVID-19 or other respiratory viruses are circulating in the community, advise patients to continue taking their 
prescribed asthma medications, including ICS, even if they have a respiratory infection. Make sure that every patient has 
a written asthma action plan. Advise people with asthma to keep up to date with respiratory vaccines (including for
pneumococcus, pertussis, COVID-19, influenza, respiratory syncytial virus) according to local advice for their age-group.
Avoid using nebulizers for patients with a respiratory infection or a high probability of infection. To deliver SABA for acute
asthma in adults and children, use a pressurized metered-dose inhaler and spacer, with a mouthpiece or tightly fitting face 
mask, if needed. Avoid spirometry in patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19. Follow infection control protocols for 
other procedures.
Before prescribing antiviral therapies for COVID-19, consult local prescribing guidelines, and check carefully for potential 
interactions with asthma therapy.
For details, see the full 2025 GINA Report. More information is available from the World Health Organization.
Managing asthma exacerbations
An exacerbation is an acute or subacute worsening in symptoms and lung function, compared with the patient’s usual 
status; some patients’ initial presentation of asthma may be with an exacerbation. Exacerbations are usually due to a viral 
upper respiratory tract infection, exposure to pollen or pollution, or poor adherence to inhaled corticosteroid treatment, but 
can also occur in people without any of these risk factors.
An exacerbation is regarded as moderate if it is troublesome for the patient and requires a change in treatment. An
exacerbation is regarded as severe if urgent treatment is needed to prevent hospitalization or death. Severe
exacerbations can be fatal, even in people with previously infrequent symptoms.
When talking to patients about exacerbations, use a word they can understand, e.g. attack, flare-up.
The management of worsening asthma and exacerbations is a continuum from self-management by the patient
(or parent/caregiver) with a written asthma action plan, through to management of severe symptoms in primary care,
the emergency department, and in hospital.
All patients should have a written asthma action plan. Examples of action plan templates for Track 1 are available at
https://www.jaci-inpractice.org/article/S2213-2198(21)01128-4/fulltext and
https://www.nationalasthma.org.au/health-professionals/asthma-action-plans/asthma-action-plan-library.
How to increase inhaled medication in a written asthma action plan 
For patients using low-dose ICS-formoterol reliever (adults/adolescents using Track 1 treatment, and children 6–11 
years using MART): advise the patient to take extra doses of their ICS-formoterol inhaler whenever needed for symptom 
relief. If using MART, they should also continue their usual doses of maintenance ICS-formoterol. They should get medical 
care if symptoms are rapidly getting worse, or are not improving after 2–3 days, or if they need more than the total daily 
maximum number of inhalations (see page 44 for usual and maximal doses).
COPYRIGHTED MATERIAL - DO NOT COPY OR DISTRIBUTE