1. IMPROVING CARE AND PROMOTING HEALTH
1. Improving Care and Promoting 
Health in Populations: Standards 
of Care in Diabetes—2026
Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S13–S26 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S001
American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for 
Diabetes*
*A complete list of members of the American 
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee 
for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/ 
10.2337/dc26-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each contributor 
is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 
1. Improving care and promoting health in 
populations: Standards of Care in Diabetes— 
2026. Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S13–S26
© 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. 
Readers may use this work for educational, 
noncommercial purposes if properly cited and 
unaltered. The version of record may be linked 
at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA 
permission is required to post this work on any 
third-party site or platform. This publication and its 
contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or 
used for text or data mining, machine learning, 
or similar technologies without prior written 
permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute 
this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes 
.org. More information is available at https:// 
diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes 
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the 
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to 
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee for 
Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the 
Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed descrip­
tion of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading sys­
tem for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional 
Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Read­
ers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at 
professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
SYSTEMS TO SUPPORT DIABETES POPULATION HEALTH
Recommendations
1.1 Ensure treatment decisions are timely, rely on evidence-based guidelines, ad­
dress social determinants of health, and incorporate shared decision-making 
based on individual values, preferences, prognoses, comorbidities, and informed 
financial considerations. B
1.2 Align approaches to diabetes management with evidence-based care mod­
els. These models emphasize person-centered team care, integrated long-term 
treatment approaches to diabetes and comorbidities, and ongoing collaborative 
communication and goal setting among all team members and with people with 
diabetes. A
1.3 Care systems should facilitate in-person and virtual team-based care, in­
clude those knowledgeable and experienced in diabetes management as part 
of the team, and utilize patient registries, decision support tools, proactive 
care planning, and community involvement to meet needs of individuals with 
diabetes. B
1.4 Assess diabetes management, risk factors, and complications using reliable 
and relevant data metrics to improve processes of care and health outcomes, 
with attention to individual values, preferences, goals for care, and treatment 
burden, including costs of care. B
1.5 Health systems should adopt a culture of continuous quality improvement, 
implement benchmarking programs, and engage interprofessional teams to sup­
port sustainable and scalable process changes to improve quality of care and 
health outcomes. A
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026                                                                                                                      
S13                      
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Diabetes and Population Health
Population health is a multidimensional 
concept that refers to the health outcomes 
of a group of individuals and the poten­
tially varied distribution of those outcomes 
within the group (1). These outcomes can 
be measured in terms of health indicators 
(mortality, morbidity, quality of life, and 
functional status), disease epidemiology 
(incidence and prevalence), and behavioral 
and metabolic factors (physical activity, nu­
trition, A1C, time in range, etc.) (1). In clini­
cal practice, population health commonly 
refers to the measurement and improve­
ment of health outcomes for a defined 
group of individuals, often those receiv­
ing care within a particular health system 
or practice, and is central to operational 
“population health management,” or the 
proactive, team-based, and data-driven 
approaches to improving health care expe­
riences and team well-being while mini- 
mizing costs and addressing inequities, in 
alignment with the Quadruple Aim (2). 
More broadly, population health refers to 
the health of all people living in a geographic 
area or community, and it centers on 
upstream drivers of health that must be 
addressed, often through cross-sector 
collaboration and policy, to improve the 
broader conditions that influence health.
Clinical practice recommendations are 
tools for health care professionals who 
seek to improve health across popula­
tions; however, for optimal outcomes, di­
abetes care must also be individualized 
for each person with diabetes and for 
each person’s context, as well as across 
the life span. Thus, efforts to improve 
population health will require a combi- 
nation of policy-level, system-level, and 
person-level approaches. With such an in­
tegrated approach in mind, the American 
Diabetes Association (ADA) highlights the 
importance of person-centered care, de­
fined as care that considers an individual’s 
comorbidities and prognoses; is respect­
ful of and responsive to individual prefer­
ences, needs, and values; and ensures 
that the individual’s values guide all clini­
cal decisions (3). Social determinants of 
health (SDOH)—factors often beyond an 
individual’s direct control and potentially 
representing lifelong risks—play a signifi­
cant role in both clinical and psychosocial 
outcomes. SDOH are defined as the eco­
nomic, environmental, political, and social 
conditions in which people live, and their 
uneven distribution is responsible for a 
major part of health inequality worldwide 
(4). To improve health, support overall 
well-being, and eliminate disparities, it is 
crucial to address these determinants, 
particularly for individuals from racial and 
ethnic minoritized communities, under­
served geographic areas (rural or urban), 
and those facing socioeconomic barriers 
to care and health (5). This section dis­
cusses the current state of diabetes and 
diabetes care in the U.S. and provides 
guidance for health care professionals as 
well as health systems, community part­
ners, payors, and policymakers on im­
proving the delivery of diabetes care to 
improve the health of all people at risk 
for or living with diabetes.
To provide actionable guidance for im­
proving the health outcomes of people with 
or at risk for diabetes, this section examines 
care delivery and payment models demon­
strated to support high-quality, evidence- 
based care; offers guidance on practical 
strategies for system-level improvement, 
including identifying and addressing gaps in 
diabetes care and outcomes experienced 
by population subgroups; and discusses 
opportunities to expand access to health 
care and diabetes self-management edu­
cation and support (DSMES) through tele­
health, mobile platforms, interprofessional 
team care, and engagement of community- 
based care partners and resources.
State of Diabetes and Diabetes Care
In 2021, an estimated 38.4 million people 
were living with diabetes, representing 
11.6% of the U.S. population. This in­
cludes 38.1 million adults aged 18 years 
and older (14.7% of U.S. adults), of whom 
8.7 million were unaware of their diagno­
sis. An additional 97.6 million adults aged 
18 years and older (38.0% of the U.S. 
population) were living with prediabetes 
(6), and over 100 million adults 20 years 
and older (41.9% of U.S. adults) were liv­
ing with obesity (7), placing them at high 
risk for developing type 2 diabetes. The 
prevalence of diabetes is increasing among 
children and adolescents as well. In 2017, 
the year for which the most recent data 
are available, the prevalence of type 1 dia­
betes was 2.15 per 10,000 individuals 
aged 19 years and under, and the preva­
lence of type 2 diabetes was 0.67 per 
1,000 individuals 10–19 years of age (prev­
alence among those under 10 years old 
was too low to be reported) (8). Obesity 
prevalence has also increased significantly 
among children and adolescents in recent 
years, affecting approximately 14.7 million 
individuals between 2 and 19 years (19.7% 
of all U.S. children and adolescents) (9).
Most concerning is the recent rise in 
the rates of diabetes complications among 
adults with diabetes across the U.S. ob­
served since the early 2010s, particularly 
for kidney failure, nontraumatic lower- 
extremity amputations, stroke, heart fail­
ure, and hyperglycemic crises, while rates 
of myocardial infarction have plateaued, 
reversing decades of earlier improvements 
(10). The proportion of people with diabe­
tes who achieve recommended A1C, blood 
pressure, and cholesterol levels has fluc­
tuated over the years, with some im­
provement over time (11,12). However, 
in 2015–2018 (the time frame for which 
the most recent population-level data are 
available), just 50.5% of U.S. community- 
dwelling adults with diabetes achieved 
A1C <7%, and 75.4% achieved A1C 
<8% (12). The goal blood pressure of 
<130/80 mmHg was achieved by just 
47.7%, non-HDL cholesterol <130 mg/dL 
was achieved by 55.7%, and all three risk 
factors were treated to goal in just 22.2% 
(12). Importantly, many people who did 
not attain A1C, blood pressure, and lipid 
goals were not receiving any or adequate 
pharmacotherapy for glycemia, hyperten­
sion, and dyslipidemia management, re­
spectively (i.e., were undertreated), which 
underscores the urgent need for care deliv­
ery systems and structural facilitators (i.e., 
health and public health policies and pay­
ment models) that enable timely and equi­
table delivery of evidence-based care and 
address diabetes prevention and treatment 
in communities (12).
Many segments of the population face 
additional and unique challenges to dia­
betes management, resulting in higher 
rates of diabetes complications, morbid­
ity, and mortality. These include children, 
adolescents, and young adults; individuals 
with complex health needs, financial or 
other social hardships, and/or limited En­
glish proficiency; and individuals in groups 
and communities that have been histori­
cally marginalized (6,10,12,13). The preva­
lence of diabetes among adults is higher 
among non-Hispanic Black individuals 
(17.4%), non-Hispanic Asian individuals 
(16.7%), and Hispanic individuals (15.5%) 
than among White individuals (13.6%). Di­
abetes prevalence is also higher among 
adults with less than a high school educa­
tion (13.1%) than among those with more 
than a high school education (6.9%), higher 
S14 
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations                                               
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
among those from families living below 
the federal poverty level (13.1%) than 
among those at 500% of federal poverty 
level of higher (5.1%), and higher among 
those living in nonmetropolitan areas (9.5%) 
than among those living in metropolitan 
areas (8.1%) (6). There is also substantial 
county-level variation in diabetes compli­
cations, mortality, and disparities in com­
plications and mortality experienced by 
minoritized racial and ethnic groups across 
the U.S. (13), underscoring the impacts of 
broader structural factors on health among 
historically marginalized populations.
Gaps and disparities in diabetes man­
agement and outcomes are also prevalent 
among children, adolescents, and young 
adults with diabetes in the U.S. Improving 
diabetes management early in life is es­
sential for preventing adverse health out­
comes and disability and improving quality 
of life both in the short- and long-term. 
There are important and nuanced consid­
erations in treating diabetes and support­
ing children, adolescents, and young 
adults with diabetes that are distinct from 
those of older adults (14). Data from 
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth (SEARCH), a 
population-based registry network of five 
centers across five U.S. states, showed 
that in 2014–2019, mean A1C was 9.1% 
(76 mmol/mol) among youth and young 
adults with type 1 diabetes and 8.9% 
(74 mmol/mol) in youth and young adults 
with type 2 diabetes; these values increased 
from 8.5% (70 mmol/mol) and 8.4% 
(68 mmol/mol), respectively, in 2002–2007 
(15). Youth and young adults with type 1 
diabetes who are non-Hispanic Black or 
Native American (compared with those 
who are non-Hispanic White), younger, not 
treated with insulin pump therapy, and 
from households with low annual income 
have significantly higher A1C levels (15). 
Data from a network of academic pediatric 
and adult centers across the U.S. revealed 
that between 2016 and 2018, mean A1C 
was 8.1% (65 mmol/mol) among children 
with type 1 diabetes at 5 years of age and 
9.3% (78 mmol/mol) among children 15–18 
years of age. Only 17% of youth under 
18 years of age with type 1 diabetes 
achieved the recommended A1C goal of 
<7.5% (<58 mmol/mol), and A1C levels 
for non-Hispanic Black youth were higher 
than those for non-Hispanic or Hispanic 
White youth, a disparity that persisted after 
adjustment for socioeconomic status (16).
Diabetes and its associated health 
complications pose a significant financial 
hardship to individuals and society. It is es­
timated that the annual cost of diagnosed 
diabetes in the U.S. in 2022 was ≥$413 bil­
lion, including ≥$307 billion in direct 
health care costs and ≥$106 billion in re­
duced productivity (17). After adjusting for 
inflation, the economic costs of diabetes 
increased by 7% between 2017 and 2022 
and by 35% between 2012 and 2022 (17). 
This is attributed to both the increased 
prevalence of diabetes and the higher cost 
per person with diabetes. People living 
with diabetes also face individual financial 
hardship, resulting in rationing or not taking 
prescribed medications, delaying care, and 
foregoing or rationing other expenditures, 
among other behaviors, and ultimately cor­
relating with higher A1C, greater diabetes 
distress, and depressive symptoms (18).
The growing gaps in diabetes care qual­
ity and outcomes, the high and rising 
costs of diabetes care across the U.S., and 
the disparities experienced by individuals 
from racial and ethnic minoritized back­
grounds and those facing socioeconomic 
barriers to care call for urgent, substantial, 
and multisectoral system-level improve­
ments to care delivery (19).
Evidence-Based Care Delivery and 
Payment Models to Improve 
Population Health
A major barrier to comprehensive high- 
quality diabetes care is a delivery system 
that is often fragmented, lacks clinical 
information capabilities, is not appropri­
ately incentivized and funded, does not 
adequately engage people with diabetes 
and the communities where they live, and 
is poorly designed for the coordinated and 
longitudinal delivery of chronic care (20). 
Several models have been demonstrated 
to improve aspects of diabetes care deliv­
ery and health outcomes.
The Chronic Care Model (CCM) is a 
commonly used framework for describing 
diabetes care programs (21). It includes 
six core elements to optimize the care of 
people with chronic disease: 
1. Delivery system design (moving from 
a reactive to a proactive care deliv­
ery system where planned visits are 
coordinated through a team-based 
approach)
2. Self-management support
3. Decision support, particularly at the 
point of care during a clinical encoun­
ter (basing care on evidence-based, 
effective care guidelines)
4. Clinical information systems (using reg­
istries that can provide person-specific 
and population-based support to the 
care team)
5. Community resources and policies 
(identifying or developing resources 
to support healthy lifestyles)
6. Health systems (to create a quality- 
oriented culture)
Randomized controlled trials of CCM 
interventions have shown that while in­
terventions vary, programs that include 
core components of the CCM decrease 
A1C (mean difference [MD] −0.21% 
[95% CI −0.30 to −0.13], P < 0.001 com­
pared with usual care), with greater im­
provements seen among adults with 
higher baseline A1C and with interven­
tions that include four or more CCM ele­
ments (22). CCM-aligned programs also 
improved blood pressure levels and pro­
cesses of diabetes care (e.g., screening 
for complications of diabetes), though 
there was no impact on cholesterol lev­
els, tobacco use, or weight (23). Multiple 
studies have examined individual compo­
nents of the CCM with respect to diabetes 
management and have found inconsistent 
levels of benefit with case management, 
team-based care, use of electronic patient 
registries, clinician education, clinician and pa­
tient reminders, and patient education and 
promotion of individual self-management 
(24). The inconsistencies in findings may be 
driven by heterogeneity of interventions, set­
tings, and evaluation strategies as well as 
structural barriers to program utilization 
and needs of communities served.
Collaborative, interprofessional teams, 
which can bring together multiple disci­
plines within the health care system, 
payors, and community partners, are best 
suited to provide care for people with 
chronic conditions such as diabetes and 
to facilitate individuals’ self-management 
(Table 1.1) (25–27). The care team, which 
centers around the person with diabetes, 
should avoid therapeutic inertia and priori­
tize timely and appropriate modification of 
behavior change interventions (nutrition 
and physical activity), pharmacologic ther­
apy, technology use, and/or social and fi­
nancial support systems for individuals who 
have not achieved recommended individu­
alized metabolic goals or are experiencing 
high burden of treatment. Engagement 
of an endocrinology team with expertise 
in diabetes management is important in 
situations when the complexity of diabetes 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                    
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S15 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 1.1—Considerations for engaging interprofessional members of a comprehensive, person-centered diabetes care 
team to identify and meet the needs of people with diabetes across the life span
Subpopulation of a person 
with diabetes
Team members to engage in care
Unique care considerations
All adults with diabetes
Primary care clinician, CDCES, RDN, and other 
specialists as available and appropriate to treat 
comorbidities (Table 4.1)
Assess for and address social determinants of health.
Adults treated with intensive 
insulin therapy, including 
multiple daily injections of 
insulin and insulin pump 
therapy
Clinicians and other health care team members 
experienced in advanced diabetes management, 
including technology use
-
All children and adolescents 
with diabetes
Primary care clinician, pediatric endocrinologist, 
CDCES, RDN, other specialists as available and 
appropriate to treat comorbidities (Table 14.1), 
daycare or school nurse or other professional, 
behavioral health professional (as needed), and 
parent(s) or caregiver(s)
Assess for and address social determinants of health 
and barriers to safety, well-being, and academic 
performance in school.  
Engage professionals within the school and 
extracurricular/after-school activities to ensure 
safe diabetes management. An individualized 
diabetes medical management plan should be 
developed in collaboration with school 
professionals and parent(s) or caregiver(s).  
Support gradual developmentally appropriate transfer 
of self-management from caregivers to the 
children and adolescents with diabetes.
Individuals with diabetes and 
diabetes-related 
complications or 
comorbidities
Specialist referrals as appropriate and available 
(e.g., behavioral health professional, cardiologist, 
endocrinologist, eye specialist, gastroenterologist 
or hepatologist, neurologist, nephrologist, obesity 
medicine specialist, or podiatrist), care 
coordinator/navigator or case manager, and 
clinical pharmacist (for those with polypharmacy 
or complex medication plans)
Screen for functional, cognitive, financial, and 
logistical barriers to self-management and 
evidence that self-care demands exceed capacity 
and available resources and support systems.
Individuals with social and/or 
structural barriers to care
Care coordinator/navigator, social services 
professional, insurance specialist/navigator, peer- 
to-peer support (as available), community health 
worker and/or community paramedic (as 
available), public health professional, and 
interpreter (as applicable)
Consider each person’s psychosocial needs, available 
resources, and support systems.
Older adults
Geriatric medicine specialist, clinical pharmacist (for 
those with polypharmacy or complex medication 
plans), CDCES and/or RDN with expertise in the 
care for older adults, social services professional, 
case manager, community services provider, and 
physical and/or occupational therapist as 
available and appropriate based on functional 
status and independence
Consider the older adult’s nutritional status, including 
ability to afford (financial barriers), acquire 
(accessibility), prepare (cooking), and consume 
(oral health) nutritious food.  
Assess for and address needs related to vision, 
hearing, dexterity, cognition, mobility, and other 
challenges.
Individuals in long-term care 
settings
Long-term care facility clinicians, nurses, other 
health care professionals, physical and 
occupational therapists, and RDN
Engage professionals within the long-term care 
facility to ensure safe and appropriate diabetes 
management.
Pregnant individuals with 
diabetes
Maternal-fetal medicine specialist or obstetrician 
experienced in the care of pregnant individuals 
with diabetes (particularly for individuals with 
type 1 diabetes or requiring intensive insulin 
therapy), CDCES, RDN, eye specialist (particularly 
for individuals with preexisting type 1 or type 2 
diabetes), other specialists as appropriate, and 
lactation consultant as appropriate
Ensure appropriate postpartum follow-up and care, 
including transition from obstetric care to 
established primary care.
Individuals with behavioral 
health conditions
Behavioral health professional, care coordinator/ 
navigator, and social services professional as age 
and situation appropriate
Use age- and situation-appropriate screening 
protocols for general and diabetes-related 
psychosocial concerns.
CDCES, certified diabetes care and education specialist; RDN, registered dietitian nutritionist.
S16 
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations                                               
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
treatment exceeds the capacity of the pri­
mary care team to effectively manage, 
including in the setting of high clinical com­
plexity and multimorbidity and difficult-to- 
manage hyperglycemia and/or hypoglyce­
mia (28–32).
Initiatives such as the Patient-Centered 
Medical Home (PCMH) model can im­
prove health outcomes by fostering com­
prehensive primary care and offering new 
opportunities for team-based chronic dis­
ease management (33–35). Accountable 
Care Organizations (ACOs), primary care–
centered delivery and payment models, can 
support the implementation of the 
CCM and ultimately improve diabetes- 
related metrics in participating organi­
zations (36). The Accountable Health 
Communities Model was introduced to 
support identifying and addressing health- 
related social needs to improve disease 
management and health outcomes (37); 
early evidence showed reduction in emer­
gency department use among Medicare 
and Medicaid beneficiaries, but diabetes- 
specific metrics were not examined, and 
program effectiveness has been limited 
by scarcity of resources to meet identified 
health-related social needs (38). Alterna­
tive Payment Models (APMs) have had 
mixed effects on diabetes care delivery 
and outcomes, with higher-risk APMs (i.e., 
models with greater financial risk assumed 
by the provider, such as capitated payment 
models) generally associated with greater 
improvements in diabetes care processes 
than lower-risk APMs (39). Value-based 
payment models are hypothesized to bet­
ter support the implementation and sus­
tainability of innovative care delivery 
models seeking to improve population 
health (33,40), though evidence for cur­
rently available value-based insurance de­
signs is limited (39).
Flexible Modalities of Care Delivery: 
Telehealth and Support for Behavioral 
Change and Well-being
Telehealth uses digital tools like video con­
ferencing, mobile apps, and remote moni­
toring to deliver a range of health services 
remotely, including clinical care, education, 
and administrative support. Telemedicine, 
a subset of telehealth, focuses specifically 
on remote clinical care, supporting diagno­
sis, treatment, and consultations through 
real-time communication. Increased ac­
cess to and effective use of telehealth 
services, alongside in-person care, can 
enhance timely access to diabetes care 
and DSMES services for individuals with 
diabetes (41–45).
Telehealth should be used to comple­
ment and not replace in-person visits for 
optimal glycemic management (46,47). A 
growing body of evidence supports the 
effectiveness of telehealth for glycemic 
management in people with diabetes. 
In a 2025 systematic umbrella review of 
30 systematic reviews and meta-analyses, 
28 reviews analyzed A1C and reported a 
significant reduction in A1C for people 
with diabetes (48). In the meta-analytic 
estimate, 16 of the 30 systematic reviews 
covering 681 unique trials showed mean 
reduction in A1C of 0.37% (95% CI 
−0.41% to −0.32%). Another 2025 system­
atic review and meta-analysis of 54 ran­
domized controlled trials with people with 
type 2 diabetes and hypertension found a 
reduction in A1C of 0.45% (95% CI −0.90% 
to 0.00%) at 6 months and 0.18% (95% CI 
−0.41% to −0.05%) at 12 months com­
pared with standard care, and systolic 
blood pressure was reduced by 5.63 
mmHg (95% CI −9.13 to −2.13) at 6 
months and 5.59 mmHg (95% CI −10.03 
to −1.14) at 12 months compared with 
standard care (49). For people with type 1 
diabetes, a 2023 systematic review and 
meta-analysis of 22 randomized controlled 
trials showed a reduction in A1C of 0.26% 
(95% CI −0.37% to −0.15%) (50). Further­
more, telehealth has been increasingly 
shown to help rural populations or those 
with limited physical access to health care 
in glycemic management as measured by 
A1C (51–54). In addition, evidence sup­
ports the effectiveness of telehealth in 
hypertension and dyslipidemia interven­
tions (55). Interactive strategies that facili­
tate communication between health care 
professionals and people with diabetes, 
including the use of web-based portals or 
text messaging and those that incorpo­
rate medication adjustment, appear to be 
effective in improving outcomes (52,56).
Telehealth and other virtual environ­
ments can be used to offer diabetes self- 
management education (DSME), carbo­
hydrate counting instruction, and clinical 
support while reducing geographic and 
transportation barriers for individuals living 
in underresourced areas or with disabil­
ities (57). Telehealth resources can also 
have a role in improving diabetes man­
agement in children and adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes (58) and address­
ing SDOH in young adults with diabe­
tes (59). Beyond pediatric populations, 
telehealth has demonstrated effective­
ness in reducing disparities and improv­
ing glycemic outcomes in racially and 
ethnically diverse adults with type 2 dia­
betes. A systematic review and meta- 
analysis of nine telehealth randomized 
controlled trials aimed at improving 
A1C among Black and Hispanic adults with 
type 2 diabetes (>50% sample) found 
a−0.47% (95% CI −0.65% to −0.28%) 
change in A1C (60). While this systematic 
review and meta-analysis reported im­
proved glycemic outcomes in marginalized 
populations, these successes typically de­
pend on substantial investments in infra­
structure (laptops, mobile phone access, 
internet access) and targeted support (digi­
tal literacy education, community health 
workers [CHWs]) that are rarely part of 
routine care (61). Without this infrastruc­
ture and support, attrition is high. Re­
search on technology and inequities 
highlights that the digital divide is driven 
by financial (cost of data plans, high- 
speed internet), informational (numeracy, 
literacy, digital skills), and technical (inter­
operability gap, complex user interfaces) 
barriers (62). Therefore, effective tele­
health design must consider accessibility, 
affordability, connectivity, trust, and con­
textual tailoring (62). Failure to do so risks 
exacerbating existing inequities.
Successful diabetes care also requires a 
systematic approach to supporting the be­
havior change efforts of people with diabe­
tes. High-quality DSMES has been shown 
to improve a person’s self-management, 
satisfaction, and glycemic outcomes (see 
section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health 
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve 
Health Outcomes,” for a detailed review 
of the evidence supporting DSMES). Na­
tional DSMES standards call for an inte­
grated approach that includes clinical 
content and skills, behavioral strategies 
(goal setting, problem-solving, etc.), and 
engagement with psychosocial concerns 
(63). Increasingly, such support is available 
through online or mobile platforms that 
can support user access and effective­
ness. Findings from a 2025 systematic re­
view and meta-analysis of 43 randomized 
controlled trials comparing DSME, diabe­
tes self-management support, or DSMES 
delivered via mHealth interventions ver­
sus usual care or attention placebo con­
trol showed modest A1C benefits: DSME 
MD −0.3% (95% CI −0.6% to −0.1%; P = 
0.002), diabetes self-management sup­
port MD −0.4% (95% CI −0.6% to −0.2%; 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                    
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S17 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
P < 0.001), and DSMES MD −0.2% (95% 
CI −0.3% to −0.0%; P < 0.001) (64). 
These curricula should be tailored to the 
needs of their intended populations, in­
cluding demographic characteristics, di­
abetes knowledge, emotional support, 
and cultural beliefs, and address the digital 
divide, i.e., access to the technology re­
quired for implementation (54,65,66).
Strategies for System-Level 
Improvement
Optimal diabetes management requires 
a systematic approach and coordinated 
team of health care professionals working 
in an environment where person-centered, 
high-quality care is a priority (23,67–69). 
While many diabetes care processes and 
access to technologies have improved na­
tionally in the past decade, the overall 
quality of care for people with diabetes re­
mains suboptimal (13). Efforts to increase 
the quality of diabetes care include provid­
ing care that is concordant with evidence- 
based guidelines (70), expanding the role 
of teams to implement more intensive dis­
ease management strategies (71), tracking 
medication-taking behavior (70), rede­
signing care processes (71), implementing 
electronic health record (EHR) population 
health tools (72), empowering and edu­
cating people with diabetes (73), reducing 
financial barriers (74), leveraging tele­
health to improve access to care (51), 
assessing and addressing psychosocial 
issues (63,75), and engaging community 
resources and public policies that sup­
port healthy lifestyles (76). The National 
Diabetes Education Program maintains 
an online resource (cdc.gov/diabetes/ 
php/toolkits/index.html) to help health 
care professionals design and imple­
ment more effective health care deliv­
ery systems for people with diabetes. 
Given the pluralistic needs of people 
with diabetes and the challenges they 
experience (complex insulin treatment 
plans, new technologies, changes in ca­
pacity for self-management, etc.) vary 
over the course of disease management 
and life span, engagement of an inter­
professional team with complementary 
expertise is essential (25). Findings from 
a systematic review and meta-analysis 
of 35 team-based care interventions with 
adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes 
showed a −0.5% (95% CI −0.7 to −0.3) 
change in A1C, −5.5 mmHg (95% CI −8.1 
to −3.0) change in systolic blood pressure, 
−3.2 mmHg (95% CI −4.8 to −1.5) change in 
diastolic blood pressure,−8.0 mg/dL (95% CI 
−11.8 to −4.3) change in LDL cholesterol, 
and −7.4 mg/dL (95% CI −13.9 to −0.9) 
change in total cholesterol (25). Team-based 
care has also been shown to reduce ath­
erosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) 
risks. Results from the Center for Inte­
grated and Novel Approaches in Vascular- 
Metabolic Disease (CINEMA) Program 
demonstrated improvements in ASCVD risk 
factors and evidence-based therapies with 
team-based care for adults with type 2 dia­
betes or prediabetes via reductions in body 
weight (−5.5 lb [−2.5 kg]), BMI (−0.9 kg/m2), 
systolic (−3.6 mmHg) and diastolic 
(−1.2 mmHg) blood pressure, A1C (−0.5%), 
LDL (−9.0 mg/dL) and total cholesterol 
(−10.7 mg/dL), triglycerides (−13.5 mg/dL), 
and absolute 10-year ASCVD risk (−2.4%) 
(77).
A systematic review concluded that 
quality improvement (QI) initiatives can 
significantly improve outcomes for peo­
ple with diabetes (24). As mandated by 
the Affordable Care Act, the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality devel­
oped a National Quality Strategy based on 
three aims: improving the health of popu­
lations, improving overall quality and the 
personal experience of care, and reducing 
per capita cost (78). QI methods have 
been documented to improve diabetes de­
vice uptake, increase screening for psycho­
social needs, and reduce inequities in 
access to diabetes technologies (79–82). 
Information and guidance specific to qual­
ity improvement and practice transforma­
tion for diabetes care are available from 
the National Institute of Diabetes and Di­
gestive and Kidney Diseases guidance on 
diabetes care and quality (83).
A successful QI team should include a 
clinical champion, administrative leader, 
QI/data specialist, and an individual living 
with or affected by diabetes. Using pa­
tient registries and EHRs, health systems 
can evaluate the quality of diabetes care 
being delivered, benchmark metrics, and 
perform intervention cycles as part of QI 
strategies (19,72,83). QI can also be used 
as an effective strategy to support appli­
cation of clinical practice recommenda­
tions by health care professionals.
The ADA recommends that health sys­
tems use proven QI methods to translate 
the Standards of Care recommendations 
into routine standards of practice.
In addition to QI approaches, other 
strategies that simultaneously improve 
the quality of care and potentially reduce 
costs are gaining momentum and include 
reimbursement structures that, in contrast 
to visit-based billing, reward the provision 
of appropriate and high-quality care to 
achieve metabolic goals (84), value-based 
payments, and incentives that accom­
modate personalized care goals (67,85). 
Alignment of payment models, health 
system care delivery models and resource 
availability, community-based organizations 
and supports, and regulatory policies is 
needed to fully support whole-person, 
comprehensive care for people with dia­
betes. See EVIDENCE-BASED CARE DELIVERY AND 
PAYMENT MODELS TO IMPROVE POPULATION HEALTH, 
above, for more information.
Access to Care
The Affordable Care Act and Medicaid ex­
pansion have increased access to care for 
many individuals with diabetes, emphasizing 
the protection of people with preexisting 
conditions, health promotion, and disease 
prevention (86). In 2024, population-level 
data for the U.S. civilian noninstitutionalized 
population included in the National Health 
Interview Survey (NHIS) showed that just 
4.9% of children and adolescents (aged 
17 years and younger), 11.1% of adults 
aged 18–64 years, and 0.6% of adults 
aged 65 years and older were uninsured 
(87). People with diabetes who have con­
sistent private or public insurance cover­
age (i.e., are not uninsured) are more 
likely to meet quality indicators for diabe­
tes care (86). However, even individuals 
with insurance coverage can experience 
financial barriers to care, particularly if 
enrolled in high-deductible health plans. 
In 2021, 28% of individuals with employer- 
sponsored health plans were enrolled in 
high-deductible health plans (88). Such 
plans are increasing in popularity; by 2023, 
51% of private industry employees had 
the option to enroll in a high-deductible 
health plan, although only 36% had access 
to health savings accounts, which can 
offset some of the out-of-pocket costs 
incurred with high-deductible plans (89). 
Switching to a high-deductible health 
plan has been shown to increase finan­
cial hardship among people with diabe­
tes (90), decrease and delay screening 
for retinopathy (91), decrease monitoring 
of blood pressure and A1C (91), and in­
crease the risks of experiencing both acute 
(severe hypoglycemia, hyperglycemic cri­
ses) (92) and chronic (myocardial in­
farction, stroke, hospitalization for heart 
S18 
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations                                               
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
failure, kidney failure, lower-extremity com­
plications, proliferative retinopathy, and 
blindness) (93) diabetes complications. 
However, health plan adoption of pre­
ventive drug lists that reduce or eliminate 
out-of-pocket cost sharing for a wide 
range of medications used to treat chronic 
conditions like diabetes reduces out- 
of-pocket expenditures for people with 
diabetes and narrows gaps in diabetes 
care (94). Insurance coverage and formu­
lary design influence treatment decisions; 
it is essential that payors cover evidence- 
based diabetes care with minimal cost shar­
ing by people with diabetes. Health care 
teams should also discuss insurance cov­
erage and financial barriers to care with 
all individuals with diabetes and pursue 
therapeutic strategies that minimize fi­
nancial hardship (74).
Access to primary and specialty care is 
essential for people with diabetes. While 
most adults with diabetes have access to 
a primary care clinician—a 2016 nationally 
representative population-based study 
found that 88% of adults with diabetes 
saw a primary care clinician in the prior 
year (95)—fewer have access to specialty 
endocrinology/diabetes care (96). A study 
of Medicare beneficiaries found that just 
33% of older adults with type 1 diabetes, 
14% of adults with type 2 diabetes and 
history of severe hypoglycemia, and 9% 
of other adults with type 2 diabetes saw 
an endocrinologist in 2019 (96). Racial 
and ethnic minoritized individuals, those 
with low income, those living in rural areas, 
and those residing in a long-term care facil­
ity were less likely to receive endocrinology 
care. Improving health outcomes for peo­
ple with diabetes will therefore require 
improving availability of and access to pri­
mary and specialty services, and interdis­
ciplinary care from the full diabetes care 
team, to meet the full range of their health 
care needs (Table 1.1).
Cost Considerations
The cost of diabetes medications and de­
vices is an ongoing barrier to achieving 
glycemic goals and preventing diabetes 
complications. Medication underuse due 
to cost has been termed “cost-related med­
ication nonadherence” (here referred to as 
cost-related barriers to medication use). 
Based on a national survey conducted 
in 2021, 18.6% of U.S. adults with type 1 
diabetes and 15.8% of adults with in­
sulin-treated type 2 diabetes reported 
rationing (i.e., skipping, taking less, and/or 
delaying) their insulin to save money (97). 
The ADA Insulin Access and Affordability 
Working Group has recommended system- 
level approaches to address this issue, 
including concepts such as cost-sharing for 
insured people with diabetes based on the 
lowest price available, a list price for insu­
lins that closely reflects the net price, and 
health plans that ensure people with dia­
betes can access insulin without undue ad­
ministrative burden or excessive cost (98). 
In 2021, the Centers for Medicare & Med­
icaid Services (CMS) launched the Part D 
Senior Savings Model (99), which re­
quired capped monthly out-of-pocket 
payments for covered insulins at $35 per 
insulin per month. In 2022, 43% of stand- 
alone Part D plan enrollees and 60% of 
Medicare Advantage Part D plan enroll­
ees participated in the Senior Savings 
Model (99). Most recently, the Inflation 
Reduction Act of 2022 capped out- 
of-pocket payments for insulin at $35 per 
insulin per month for all Medicare benefi­
ciaries. A patchwork of solutions has also 
been introduced for individuals with com­
mercial insurance and those without health 
insurance. Over the past 5 years, 25 
states and the District of Columbia have 
capped out-of-pocket expenditures for 
insulin in select state-regulated com­
mercial health plans (100), which has re­
sulted in modest decreases in insulin out- 
of-pocket spending for eligible enrollees 
(101). Between 2023 and 2024, three ma­
jor insulin manufacturers similarly low­
ered the price of insulin to $35 per 
month in select circumstances (102). 
These programs may help reduce the fi­
nancial hardship of diabetes manage­
ment, though many are challenging to 
navigate, not all people with diabetes can 
benefit, and costs for insulin delivery and 
glucose monitoring remain high. Thus, all 
people with diabetes should be screened 
for financial hardship of treatment, cost- 
related barriers to medication use, and 
rationing of other essential services due 
to medical costs (103).
The cost of medications (not only insu­
lin) influences prescribing patterns and 
medication use because of the financial 
strain on the person with diabetes and 
the lack of secondary payor support (pub­
lic and private insurance) for effective ap­
proved glucose-lowering, cardiovascular 
and kidney disease risk–reducing, and obe­
sity management therapies. There is robust 
evidence of gaps in the use of evidence- 
based therapies among individuals from ra­
cial and ethnic minoritized backgrounds, 
those with lower income levels, those living 
in rural areas, and those with limited insur­
ance coverage (11,104–112). Identifying 
and addressing financial barriers should be 
a focus of treatment goals and clinical deci­
sions (104). (See TAILORING TREATMENT FOR SOCIAL 
CONTEXT.)
TAILORING TREATMENT FOR 
SOCIAL CONTEXT
Recommendations
1.6 Health systems should assess and 
address gaps in diabetes care and 
health outcomes (e.g., by stratifying 
clinical quality data by factors such as 
insurance status, race, ethnicity, pre­
ferred language for health care discus­
sions, disability, and social determinants 
of health). B
1.7 During clinical encounters, assess 
for social determinants of health, in­
cluding food insecurity, A housing 
insecurity, financial barriers, health 
insurance and health care access, 
environmental and neighborhood fac­
tors, and social capital/social commu­
nity support, B to inform treatment 
decisions, with referral to appropriate 
local community resources.
1.8 Provide people with diabetes 
additional self-management support 
from lay health coaches, navigators, 
or community health workers when 
available. A Digital self-management 
tools or coaches may be considered as 
appropriate. B
1.9 Consider the involvement of com­
munity health workers to support 
management of diabetes and cardio­
vascular and kidney risk factors, espe­
cially in underserved communities and 
health care systems. B
Health inequities related to diabetes 
and its complications are well docu­
mented, are heavily influenced by SDOH, 
and have been associated with greater 
risk for developing diabetes, higher dis­
ease prevalence, and worse diabetes- 
related outcomes (4). Greater exposure to 
adverse SDOH over the life course re­
sults in poor health (113). Interventions 
to address SDOH can improve diabetes- 
related outcomes (114,115). Using clini­
cal quality data to identify inequities 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                    
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S19 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
and opportunities for improvement is 
valuable for health care professionals, 
health systems, payors, policymakers, and 
people with diabetes (116). The Joint Com­
mission requires that all accredited organi­
zations in its ambulatory health care, 
behavioral health care and human services, 
critical access hospital, and hospital accredi­
tation programs collect race and ethnicity 
information and implement specific steps 
to reduce health care disparities. The Joint 
Commission specifically requires that or­
ganizations designate an individual or in­
dividuals to lead efforts to reduce health 
care disparities, assess health-related so­
cial needs and provide information on 
community resources to meet these needs, 
identify health care disparities by stratifying 
quality and safety data using sociodemo­
graphic characteristics, develop an action 
plan to address health care disparities, 
work to actively reduce health care dis­
parities, and inform key stakeholders 
about progress to reduce health care dis­
parities (117). The CMS Framework for 
Health Equity similarly prioritizes collec­
tion, reporting, and analysis of standardized 
individual-level demographic (including race, 
ethnicity, language, gender identity, sex, sex­
ual orientation, and disability status) and 
SDOH data as well as assessing for and ad­
dressing disparities through improved access 
to culturally tailored services, team-based 
care, and community resources (118). Qual­
ity measures assessing SDOH screening and 
intervention have been introduced by the 
National Committee for Quality Assurance 
(focused on food, housing, and transporta­
tion insecurity) (113) and CMS (focused on 
food, housing, and transportation insecu­
rity, utility difficulties, and interpersonal 
safety) (119).
Other than the SDOH, there are many 
contributors to inequities, including im­
plicit and explicit bias, discriminatory poli­
cies and procedures, institutional practices, 
and both current and historical structural 
factors that affect health and well-being 
for individuals and communities (120–122). 
The ADA recognizes the association be­
tween interpersonal, social, economic, and 
environmental factors and the prevention 
and treatment of diabetes and has issued 
a call for research that seeks to better un­
derstand how social determinants influence 
behaviors and how the relationships be­
tween these variables can be modified for 
enhancing the prevention and management 
of diabetes (114). While a comprehensive 
strategy to reduce diabetes-related health 
disparities in populations is yet to be for­
mally studied, general recommendations 
from other chronic disease management 
and prevention models can be drawn 
upon to inform system-level strategies in 
diabetes (62). For example, the National 
Academy of Medicine has published a 
framework for educating health care 
professionals on the importance of 
SDOH (123). Furthermore, there are re­
sources available for the inclusion of stan­
dardized sociodemographic variables in 
EHRs to facilitate the assessment of health 
disparities and the impact of interven­
tions designed to reduce those dispar­
ities (78,124,125).
SDOH are not consistently recognized 
and often go undiscussed—and are ulti­
mately not addressed—during clinical en­
counters (126). Even financial barriers to 
care and health, which directly affect the 
ability to implement prescribed care 
plans, are rarely discussed. Among peo­
ple with chronic illnesses, two-thirds of 
those who reported not taking medica­
tions as prescribed due to cost-related 
barriers never shared this information 
with their physician (123). A study using 
data from the NHIS found that half of 
adults with diabetes reported financial 
stress and about 20% reported food in­
security (126). Studies of both type 1 dia­
betes and type 2 diabetes have noted an 
association of one or more adverse 
SDOH with health care utilization and 
poor diabetes outcomes among individ­
uals with diabetes (123,127). It is there­
fore important for people with diabetes to 
be screened for SDOH during clinical en­
counters and be referred to appropriate 
clinical and community resources to ad­
dress these needs (Table 1.1). Furthermore, 
health systems may benefit from compiling 
an inventory of local resources to facilitate 
referrals at the point of care, augmenting 
as necessary existing tools such as find­
help.org, Unite Us, 211 (United Way), and 
others. Policies and payment models that 
support addressing SDOH, both within 
and outside the health care setting, are 
needed to ensure that these efforts are 
both feasible and sustainable. One exam­
ple of a statewide payment model that 
incentivizes value-based care, addressing 
SDOH and funding community-based health 
care professionals, is the Maryland Total 
Cost of Care Model, although it is currently 
limited by a narrow focus on preventing di­
abetes and does not consider diabetes care 
quality or health outcomes in people with 
diabetes (116,128).
A population in which such issues must 
be particularly considered is older adults, 
for whom social difficulties may further 
impair quality of life and increase the 
risk of functional dependency (129) (see 
section 13, “Older Adults,” for a detailed 
discussion of social considerations in 
older adults).
Creating system-level mechanisms to 
screen for SDOH may help overcome 
structural barriers and communication 
gaps between people with diabetes and 
health care professionals (126,130). A 
number of studies have proven the effec­
tiveness of identifying SDOH by using vali­
dated screening tools (131). In addition, 
brief, validated screening tools for some 
SDOH exist and could facilitate discussion 
around factors that significantly impact 
treatment during clinical encounters.
Food Insecurity
Food insecurity is a household-level eco­
nomic and social condition of limited or 
uncertain access to adequate food (132). 
In 2022, almost 13% of Americans were 
food insecure (132), and food insecurity is 
associated with increased risk of type 2 
diabetes and higher-than-recommended 
glycemia (133–135). The rate is dispropor­
tionately higher among some groups that 
have been historically marginalized, low- 
income households, and households headed 
by single mothers. Additionally, those fac­
ing food insecurity have lower engagement 
in self-care behaviors and medication use, 
have higher rates of depression and diabe­
tes distress, and have worse glycemic man­
agement compared with individuals who 
are food secure (133,134). Older adults 
with food insecurity are more likely to have 
emergency department visits and hospital­
izations compared with older adults who 
do not report food insecurity (136). The 
risk for food insecurity can be assessed 
with a validated two-item screening tool 
that includes the following statements: 
1) “Within the past 12 months, we worried 
whether our food would run out before we 
got money to buy more” and 2) “Within 
the past 12 months the food we bought 
just didn’t last, and we didn’t have money 
to get more” (137). Interventions such as 
food prescription programs are consid­
ered promising to address food insecurity 
by integrating community resources into 
primary care settings and directly dealing 
S20 
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations                                               
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
with food deserts in underserved com­
munities (135).
In those with diabetes and food insecu­
rity, the priority is mitigating the increased 
risk for severe hyperglycemia and hypogly­
cemia (138,139). The reasons for the in­
creased risk of hyperglycemia can include the 
consumption of inexpensive carbohydrate- 
rich processed foods, binge eating, finan­
cial constraints to filling diabetes medica­
tion prescriptions, anxiety and depression, 
and poor sleep, all contributing to hyper­
glycemia and poor diabetes self-care be­
haviors. Hypoglycemia can occur as a 
result of inadequate or inconsistent car­
bohydrate consumption following the ad­
ministration of a sulfonylurea or insulin. 
Health care professionals should consider 
these factors when making treatment de­
cisions for people with food insecurity and 
seek local resources to help people with 
diabetes and their family members obtain 
appropriate food more regularly (140).
Housing Insecurity
Housing insecurity has been shown to be 
directly associated with a person’s ability 
to maintain appropriate diabetes self- 
management (141). Housing insecurity 
often coexists with other barriers that 
challenge diabetes self-management. Food 
insecurity, lack of health insurance, cogni­
tive impairment, behavioral health con­
cerns, and low literacy and numeracy skills 
are also factors (140). The prevalence of di­
abetes among people experiencing hous­
ing insecurity is estimated to be around 
8% in the U.S. (142). Additionally, people 
with diabetes and housing insecurity need 
secure places to keep their diabetes medi­
cations and supplies as well as refrigerator 
access to safely store insulin. The risk for 
housing insecurity can be ascertained us­
ing a brief risk assessment tool developed 
and validated for use among veterans 
(143). Given the potential challenges, health 
care professionals who care for housing- 
insecure individuals should be familiar 
with resources to support these individu­
als or have access to social workers who 
can facilitate stable housing as a way to 
improve diabetes care (144).
Refugee Populations and Migrant 
and Seasonal Agricultural Workers
Refugee status, like having a diabetes 
diagnosis, is an independent risk factor 
for cardiovascular disease (145). In areas 
experiencing humanitarian crises, refu­
gees are at greater risk for obstacles to 
optimal chronic disease management, 
but unfortunately there are few quality 
investigations into diabetes care and its 
outcomes among refugees. There have 
been efforts to develop models of care 
specifically aimed at improving the health 
of refugee populations, but more work is 
needed to demonstrate effectiveness of 
those care models and approaches (146).
Migrant and seasonal agricultural work­
ers likely have a higher risk of type 2 diabe­
tes than the general population. While 
migrant farmworker–specific data are lack­
ing, most agricultural workers in the U.S. 
are Latino, a population with a high rate of 
type 2 diabetes. In addition, living in severe 
poverty brings with it food insecurity, high 
chronic stress, and an increased risk of dia­
betes; there is also an association between 
the exposure to certain pesticides and the 
incidence of diabetes (147).
Data from the Department of Labor 
indicate that there are approximately 
2.18 million agricultural workers in the 
U.S. (148). These agricultural workers 
often travel throughout the country sea­
sonally (149). In 2022, 175 health centers 
across the U.S. reported providing care to 
843,071 adult migrant farmworkers, and 
91,839 had encounters for diabetes (147). 
In a 2023 report on the National Agricul­
tural Workers Survey, age-adjusted self-re­
ported diabetes prevalence was 13.51% 
(95% CI 10.0–17.1) among migrant farm­
workers and 10.8% (95% CI 9.0–12.6) 
among nonmigrant farmworkers (147).
Migrant farmworkers and other agri­
cultural workers encounter numerous and 
overlapping barriers to receiving care. Mi­
gration, which might occur as frequently 
as every few weeks for some, disrupts 
care. Common barriers to adequate diabe­
tes care include those related to cost, 
culture, language, literacy, transportation, 
geographic distance, food access, long 
work hours, unfamiliarity with new com­
munities, the complexity of the U.S. health 
care system, and limited access to various 
other resources like medications and 
DSMES (149). Without regular care, 
farmworkers with diabetes can experi­
ence severe and often expensive compli­
cations that incur morbidity and mortality 
and affect quality of life. Nontraditional 
care delivery models, including mobile in­
tegrated health and telehealth, should be 
leveraged to improve access to care.
Health care professionals need to be 
attuned to the working and living condi­
tions of people with diabetes. For example, 
if a farmworker with diabetes presents for 
care, appropriate referrals should be ini­
tiated to social workers and community 
resources, as available, to assist with re­
moving barriers to care.
Language Barriers
Health systems and health care professio­
nals caring for those with limited English 
proficiency should develop or offer educa­
tional programs and materials in culturally 
appropriate languages. Professional lan­
guage assistance (i.e., interpreters) should 
be provided to individuals with limited 
English proficiency and/or other commu­
nication needs at no cost to them (150). 
Use of untrained interpreters, including 
family members, should be avoided when 
possible, as this can result in confusing or 
inaccurate conveyance of information. Ac­
companying written materials should be in 
the language appropriate for the individual 
being supported and at a reading level that 
is not overly complicated—typically this is 
defined as a sixth-grade reading level. 
Numerous medical translation tools are 
available and show promise in addressing 
language barriers, although further re­
search is needed to establish their effi­
cacy in diabetes care (151).
The National Standards for Culturally 
and Linguistically Appropriate Services in 
Health and Health Care (National CLAS 
Standards) provide guidance on how health 
care professionals can reduce language 
barriers by improving their cultural com­
petency, addressing health literacy, and 
ensuring communication with professional 
language assistance (150). In addition, the 
National CLAS Standards website offers 
several resources and materials that can 
be used to improve the quality of care de­
livery to individuals with limited English 
proficiency.
Health Literacy and Numeracy
Health literacy is the degree to which 
individuals can obtain, process, and un­
derstand basic health information and 
services needed to make appropriate 
decisions (152,153). Health literacy is 
strongly associated with individuals en­
gaging in complex disease management 
and self-care (154). Approximately 9 out 
of 10 American adults are estimated 
to have limited or low health literacy 
(152,155). Health care professionals 
and diabetes care and education special­
ists should provide easy-to-understand 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                    
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S21 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
information and reduce unnecessary com­
plexity when developing care plans. Inter­
ventions addressing low health literacy in 
populations with diabetes demonstrate im­
provements in A1C, diabetes knowledge, 
and self-management behaviors (156). 
However, more research is needed to es­
tablish the most effective strategies for en­
hancing retention and application of 
diabetes knowledge among various popu­
lations of people with diabetes (154,157).
Health numeracy is also essential in 
diabetes prevention and management. 
Health numeracy requires primary nu­
meric skills, applied health numeracy, and 
interpretive health numeracy, which is es­
pecially important for people using diabe­
tes technologies like insulin pumps (158). 
People with prediabetes or diabetes often 
need to perform numeric tasks, such as 
interpreting glucose readings, decoding 
food labels, and understanding medica­
tion doses, timings, and refills, to make 
treatment decisions. Thus, both health lit­
eracy and numeracy are necessary for en­
abling effective communication between 
people with diabetes and health care pro­
fessionals, arriving at a treatment plan, 
and making diabetes self-management 
task decisions. If people with diabetes ap­
pear not to understand concepts associ­
ated with treatment decisions, both can 
be assessed using standardized screening 
measures (159). Adjunctive education and 
support may be indicated if limited health 
literacy and numeracy are barriers to opti­
mal care decisions (75).
Social and Community Support
Social support, which comprises commu­
nity and personal network instrumental 
support, promotes better health, whereas 
lack of social support is associated with 
poorer health outcomes in individuals 
with diabetes (114). Of particular concern 
are the SDOH, including, among others, 
racism and discrimination (160). These 
factors are rarely addressed in routine 
clinical practice but may be drivers of ad­
verse health outcomes and lower engage­
ment in beneficial self-care behaviors and 
medication use. Identifying and leveraging 
community resources are core components 
of chronic care management (21,161).
Various organizations, including the 
American Medical Association and the 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual­
ity, among others, promote the translation 
of clinical recommendations for nutrition 
and physical activity into practice 
through health care community link­
ages and community-based care delivery 
(162). CHWs (160), community paramedics 
(163,164), peer supporters (162,165), and 
lay leaders (166) may assist in the delivery 
of DSMES services (124,167), particularly 
in underserved communities. The Ameri­
can Public Health Association defines a 
CHW as a “frontline public health worker 
who is a trusted member of and/or has an 
unusually close understanding of the com­
munity served” (168). CHWs can be part 
of an evidence-based strategy to improve 
the management of diabetes and cardio­
vascular risk factors in underserved com­
munities and health care systems (169). 
The CHW scope of practice in areas such 
as outreach and communication, advo­
cacy, social support, basic health educa­
tion, referrals to community clinics, and 
other services has successfully provided 
social and primary preventive services to 
underserved populations in rural and hard- 
to-reach communities. Even though CHWs’ 
core competencies are not clinical in nature, 
in some circumstances, clinicians may dele­
gate limited clinical tasks to CHWs. If such is 
the case, these tasks must always be per­
formed under the direct supervision of the 
delegating health professional and follow­
ing state health care laws and statutes 
(170,171). Community paramedics are ad­
vanced paramedics with training in chronic 
disease monitoring and education, medica­
tion management, care coordination, and 
SDOH in addition to their emergency medi­
cal services expertise. While their scope of 
practice varies across states, community 
paramedics can engage and support peo­
ple living with diabetes under the direction 
of a medical director by delivering diabetes 
education, assisting with medication man­
agement, performing health assessments 
and wound care, and connecting people 
with diabetes and care partners with clini­
cal and community resources (163,164).
SUMMARY
Improving individual and population health 
for people with and at risk for diabetes re­
quires engagement of and collaboration 
between people with diabetes and their 
caregivers, interprofessional health care 
teams, health systems, community partners, 
payors, policymakers, and public health 
agencies. This section provides guidance 
to facilitate implementation of evidence- 
based diabetes care recommendations 
that are discussed in the Standards of Care 
with the goal of improving health, elimi­
nating health disparities, and reducing the 
impact of diabetes and its complications 
on individuals and society.
References
1. Silberberg M, Martinez-Bianchi V, Lyn MJ. What 
is population health? Prim Care 2019;46:475–484
2. Bodenheimer T, Sinsky C. From triple to 
quadruple aim: care of the patient requires care 
of the provider. Ann Fam Med 2014;12:573–576    
3. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on 
Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing the 
Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st 
Century. Washington, DC, National Academies 
Press, 2001
4. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al. 
Social determinants of health and diabetes: a 
scientific review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
5. Haire-Joshu D, Hill-Briggs F. The next generation 
of diabetes translation: a path to health equity. 
Annu Rev Public Health 2019;40:391–410
6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
National Diabetes Statistics Report. Accessed 4 
August 2025. Available from https://www.cdc 
.gov/diabetes/php/data-research/index.html
7. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Adult Obesity Facts. Accessed 4 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/adult- 
obesity-facts/index.html
8. Lawrence JM, Divers J, Isom S, et al.; SEARCH 
for Diabetes in Youth Study Group. Trends in 
prevalence of type 1 and type 2 diabetes in 
children and adolescents in the US, 2001–2017. 
JAMA 2021;326:717–727
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Childhood Obesity Facts. Accessed 4 August 
2025. Available from https://www.cdc.gov/ 
obesity/childhood-obesity-facts/childhood-obesity- 
facts.html
10. Saelee R, Bullard KM, Hora IA, et al. Trends 
and inequalities in diabetes-related complications 
among U.S. Adults, 2000–2020. Diabetes Care 
2025;48:18–28
11. Ebekozien O, Mungmode A, Sanchez J, et al. 
Longitudinal trends in glycemic outcomes and 
technology use for over 48,000 people with type 1 
diabetes (2016-2022) from the T1D Exchange 
Quality Improvement Collaborative. Diabetes 
Technol Ther 2023;25:765–773
12. Fang M, Wang D, Coresh J, Selvin E. Trends in 
diabetes treatment and control in U.S. adults, 
1999–2018. N Engl J Med 2021;384:2219–2228
13. Nassereldine H, Li Z, Compton K, et al. The 
burden of diabetes mortality by county, race, and 
ethnicity in the U.S., 2000–2019. Diabetes Care 
2025;48:546–555
14. Chiang JL, Maahs DM, Garvey KC, et al. 
Type 1 diabetes in children and adolescents: a 
position statement by the American Diabetes 
Association. Diabetes Care 2018;41:2026–2044
15. Malik FS, Sauder KA, Isom S, et al.; SEARCH 
for Diabetes in Youth Study. Trends in glycemic 
control among youth and young adults with 
diabetes: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. 
Diabetes Care 2022;45:285–294
16. Foster NC, Beck RW, Miller KM, et al. State of 
type 1 diabetes management and outcomes from 
the T1D Exchange in 2016–2018. Diabetes Technol 
Ther 2019;21:66–72
S22 
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations                                               
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
17. Parker ED, Lin J, Mahoney T, et al. Economic 
costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2022. Diabetes 
Care 2024;47:26–43
18. Patel MR, Zhang G, Heisler M, et al. 
Measurement and validation of the Comprehensive 
Score for Financial Toxicity (COST) in a population 
with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2535–2543
19. Prahalad P, Hardison H, Odugbesan O, et al.; 
T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative. 
Benchmarking diabetes technology use among 21 
U.S. pediatric diabetes centers. Clin Diabetes 2024; 
42:27–33
20. Chehal PK, Selvin E, DeVoe JE, Mangione 
CM, Ali MK. Diabetes and the fragmented state 
of US health care and policy. Health Aff (Millwood) 
2022;41:939–946
21. Stellefson M, Dipnarine K, Stopka C. The 
chronic care model and diabetes management in 
US primary care settings: a systematic review. 
Prev Chronic Dis 2013;10:E26
22. Goh LH, Siah CJR, Tam WWS, Tai ES, Young 
DYL. Effectiveness of the chronic care model for 
adults with type 2 diabetes in primary care: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Syst Rev 
2022;11:273
23. Tricco AC, Ivers NM, Grimshaw JM, et al. 
Effectiveness of quality improvement strategies 
on the management of diabetes: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2012;379: 
2252–2261
24. Konnyu KJ, Yogasingam S, Lépine J, et al. 
Quality improvement strategies for diabetes 
care: effects on outcomes for adults living with 
diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023;5: 
CD014513
25. Levengood TW, Peng Y, Xiong KZ, et al.; 
Community Preventive Services Task Force. 
Team-based care to improve diabetes management: 
a community guide meta-analysis. Am J Prev Med 
2019;57:e17–e26
26. Lee JK, McCutcheon LRM, Fazel MT, Cooley 
JH, Slack MK. Assessment of interprofessional 
collaborative practices and outcomes in adults 
with diabetes and hypertension in primary care: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 
Netw Open 2021;4:e2036725
27. Oshman L, Bhomia N, Diez HL, et al. The 
Michigan Collaborative for Type 2 Diabetes 
(MCT2D): development and implementation of a 
statewide collaborative quality initiative. BMC 
Health Serv Res 2024;24:1254
28. Avnat E, Chodick G, Shalev V. Identifying 
profiles of patients with uncontrolled type 2 
diabetes who would benefit from referral to an 
endocrinologist. Endocr Pract 2023;29:855–861
29. Setji TL, Page C, Pagidipati N, Goldstein BA. 
Differences in achieving Hba1c goals among 
patients seen by endocrinologists and primary 
care providers. Endocr Pract 2019;25:461–469
30. McCoy RG, Vandergrift JL, Gray B. Patient 
and physician factors driving the gaps in use of 
drugs with cardiovascular and kidney benefits by 
Medicare beneficiaries with type 2 diabetes 
treated by endocrinologists, nephrologists, and 
cardiologists: population-based cohort study. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2025;221:112039
31. Phan T-L, Hossain J, Lawless S, Werk LN. 
Quarterly visits with glycated hemoglobin 
monitoring: the sweet spot for glycemic control in 
youth with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2014; 
37:341–345
32. Booth GL, Shah BR, Austin PC, Hux JE, Luo J, 
Lok CE. Early specialist care for diabetes: who 
benefits most? A propensity score-matched cohort 
study. Diabet Med 2016;33:111–118
33. Adler-Milstein J, Linden A, Hollingsworth JM, 
Ryan AM. Association of primary care engagement 
in value-based reform programs with health 
services outcomes: participation and synergies. 
JAMA Health Forum 2022;3:e220005
34. Bojadzievski T, Gabbay RA. Patient-centered 
medical home and diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011; 
34:1047–1053
35. McManus LS, Dominguez-Cancino KA, Stanek 
MK, et al. The patient-centered medical home as 
an intervention strategy for diabetes mellitus: a 
systematic review of the literature. Curr Diabetes 
Rev 2021;17:317–331
36. Fraze TK, Lewis VA, Tierney E, Colla CH. 
Quality of care improves for patients with 
diabetes in Medicare shared savings accountable 
care organizations: organizational characteristics 
associated with performance. Popul Health Manag 
2018;21:401–408
37. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 
Accountable Health Communities Model. Accessed 
8 August 2025. Available from https://www.cms 
.gov/priorities/innovation/innovation-models/ahcm
38. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 
Accountable Health Communities (AHC) Model 
Evaluation. Second Evaluation Report Accessed 
8 August 2025. Available from https://www.cms 
.gov/priorities/innovation/data-and-reports/2023/ 
ahc-second-eval-rpt
39. Wang S, Weyer G, Duru OK, Gabbay RA, 
Huang ES. Can alternative payment models and 
value-based insurance design alter the course of 
diabetes in the United States? Health Aff (Millwood) 
2022;41:980–984
40. Gunter KE, Peek ME, Tanumihardjo JP, et al. 
Population health innovations and payment to 
address social needs among patients and 
communities with diabetes. Milbank Q 2021; 
99:928–973
41. Katula JA, Dressler EV, Kittel CA, et al. Effects 
of a digital diabetes prevention program: an RCT. 
Am J Prev Med 2022;62:567–577
42. Eberle C, Stichling S. Clinical improvements 
by telemedicine interventions managing type 1 
and type 2 diabetes: systematic meta-review. J 
Med Internet Res 2021;23:e23244
43. American Telemedicine Association. Telehealth: 
defining 21st Century Care. Accessed 8 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.americantelemed.org/ 
resource/why-telemedicine/
44. Health IT. Telehealth StartUp and Resource 
Guide Version 1.1. Accessed 8 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.healthit.gov/sites/ 
default/files/telehealthguide_final_0.pdf
45. American Medical Association. AMA Telehealth 
Quick Guide. Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from 
https://www.ama-assn.org/practice-management/ 
digital/ama-telehealth-quick-guide
46. Zupa MF, Vimalananda VG, Rothenberger SD, 
et al. Patterns of telemedicine use and glycemic 
outcomes of endocrinology care for patients with 
type 2 diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6: 
e2346305
47. Mullur RS, Hsiao JS, Mueller K. Telemedicine 
in diabetes care. Am Fam Physician 2022;105: 
281–288
48. Ravi S, Meyerowitz-Katz G, Yung C, et al. Effect 
of virtual care in type 2 diabetes management—a 
systematic umbrella review of systematic reviews 
and meta-analysis. BMC Health Serv Res 2025; 
25:348
49. Mihevc M, Virtic Potocnik T, Zavrnik C, 
Klemenc-Ketiš Z, Poplas Susic A, Petek Ster M. 
Managing cardiovascular risk factors with 
telemedicine in primary care: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of patients with arterial 
hypertension and type 2 diabetes. Chronic Illn 
2025;21:3–24
50. Udsen FW, Hangaard S, Bender C, et al. The 
effectiveness of telemedicine solutions in type 1 
diabetes management: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2023;17: 
782–793
51. Kobe EA, Lewinski AA, Jeffreys AS, et al. 
Implementation of an intensive telehealth 
intervention for rural patients with clinic-refractory 
diabetes. J Gen Intern Med 2022;37:3080–3088
52. Heitkemper EM, Mamykina L, Travers J, 
Smaldone A. Do health information technology 
self-management interventions improve glycemic 
control in medically underserved adults with 
diabetes? A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
J Am Med Inform Assoc 2017;24:1024–1035
53. Jarvandi S, Roberson P, Greig J, Upendram S, 
Grion J. Effectiveness of diabetes education 
interventions in rural America: a systematic 
review. Health Educ Res 2023;38:286–305
54. Moschonis G, Siopis G, Jung J, et al.; 
DigiCare4You Consortium. Effectiveness, reach, 
uptake, and feasibility of digital health interventions 
for adults with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. 
Lancet Digit Health 2023;5:e125–e143
55. Timpel P, Oswald S, Schwarz PEH, Harst L. 
Mapping the evidence on the effectiveness of 
telemedicine interventions in diabetes, dyslipidemia, 
and hypertension: an umbrella review of systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses. J Med Internet Res 
2020;22:e16791
56. Faruque LI, Wiebe N, Ehteshami-Afshar A, et 
al.; Alberta Kidney Disease Network. Effect of 
telemedicine on glycated hemoglobin in diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
trials. CMAJ 2017;189:E341–E364
57. Li Y, Yang Y, Liu X, Zhang X, Li F. Effectiveness 
of telemedicine-delivered carbohydrate-counting 
interventions in patients with type 1 diabetes: 
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Med 
Internet Res 2025;27:e59579
58. Zhang K, Huang Q, Wang Q, et al. Telemedicine 
in improving glycemic control among children and 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Med Internet Res 
2024;26:e51538
59. Garcia JF, Fogel J, Reid M, Bisno DI, 
Raymond JK. Telehealth for young adults with 
diabetes: addressing social determinants of health. 
Diabetes Spectr 2021;34:357–362
60. Anderson A, O’Connell SS, Thomas C, 
Chimmanamada R. Telehealth interventions to 
improve diabetes management among Black 
and Hispanic patients: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities 
2022;9:2375–2386
61. Mayberry LS, Lyles CR, Oldenburg B, Osborn 
CY, Parks M, Peek ME. mHealth interventions for 
disadvantaged and vulnerable people with type 2 
diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2019;19:148
62. Ebekozien O, Fantasia K, Farrokhi F, Sabharwal 
A, Kerr D. Technology and health inequities in 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                    
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S23 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetes care: how do we widen access to 
underserved populations and utilize technology 
to improve outcomes for all? Diabetes Obes Metab 
2024;26(Suppl. 1):3–13
63. Davis J, Fischl AH, Beck J, et al. 2022 National 
Standards for Diabetes Self-Management Education 
and Support. Diabetes Care 2022;45:484–494
64. Versluis A, Boels AM, Huijden MCG, 
Mijnsbergen MD, Rutten GEHM, Vos RC. Diabetes 
self-management education and support delivered 
by mobile health (mHealth) interventions for 
adults with type 2 diabetes—a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Diabet Med 2025;42:e70002
65. Tanhapour M, Peimani M, Rostam Niakan 
Kalhori S, et al. The effect of personalized 
intelligent digital systems for self-care training on 
type II diabetes: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis of clinical trials. Acta Diabetol 2023; 
60:1599–1631
66. Abu S, Llahana S. Factors influencing the 
uptake of culturally tailored diabetes self- 
management education and support programmes 
among ethnic minority patients with type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review. Prim Care Diabetes 
2025;19:103–110
67. TRIAD Study Group. Health systems, patients 
factors, and quality of care for diabetes: a 
synthesis of findings from the TRIAD study. Diabetes 
Care 2010;33:940–947
68. Schmittdiel JA, Gopalan A, Lin MW, Banerjee S, 
Chau CV, Adams AS. Population health management 
for diabetes: health care system-level approaches for 
improving quality and addressing disparities. Curr 
Diab Rep 2017;17:31
69. Peterson KA, Carlin CS, Solberg LI, Normington 
J, Lock EF. Care management processes important 
for high-quality diabetes care. Diabetes Care 2023; 
46:1762–1769
70. Raebel MA, Schmittdiel J, Karter AJ, Konieczny 
JL, Steiner JF. Standardizing terminology and 
definitions of medication adherence and persistence 
in research employing electronic databases. Med 
Care 2013;51:S11–S21
71. Feifer C, Nemeth L, Nietert PJ, et al. Different 
paths to high-quality care: three archetypes of 
top-performing practice sites. Ann Fam Med 
2007;5:233–241
72. Mungmode A, Noor N, Weinstock RS, et al. 
Making diabetes electronic medical record data 
actionable: promoting benchmarking and population 
health improvement using the T1D Exchange Quality 
Improvement Portal. Clin Diabetes 2022;41:45–55
73. Powell RE, Zaccardi F, Beebe C, et al. 
Strategies for overcoming therapeutic inertia in 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2137–2154
74. Herges JR, Neumiller JJ, McCoy RG. Easing 
the financial burden of diabetes management: a 
guide for patients and primary care clinicians. 
Clin Diabetes 2021;39:427–436
75. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F, 
Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care 
for people with diabetes: a position statement of 
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes 
Care 2016;39:2126–2140
76. Pullen-Smith B, Carter-Edwards L, Leathers 
KH. Community health ambassadors: a model for 
engaging community leaders to promote better 
health in North Carolina. J Public Health Manag 
Pract 2008;14(Suppl.):S73–S81
77. Neeland IJ, Arafah A, Bourges-Sevenier B, et 
al. Second-year results from CINEMA: a novel, 
patient-centered, team-based intervention for 
patients with type 2 diabetes or prediabetes at 
high cardiovascular risk. Am J Prev Cardiol 2024; 
17:100630
78. Kahkoska AR, Busby-Whitehead J, Jonsson 
Funk M, et al. Receipt of diabetes specialty care 
and management services by older adults with 
diabetes in the U.S., 2015–2019: an analysis of 
Medicare fee-for-service claims. Diabetes Care 
2024;47:1181–1185
79. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
About the National Quality Strategy. Accessed 
4 August 2025. Available from https://www.ahrq. 
gov/workingforquality/about/nqs-fact-sheets/nqs- 
fact-sheet-0214.html
80. Odugbesan O, Mungmode A, Rioles N, et al.; 
T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative. 
Increasing continuous glucose monitoring use for 
non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic people with type 1 
diabetes: results from the T1D Exchange Quality 
Improvement Collaborative Equity Study. Clin 
Diabetes 2024;42:40–48
81. Odugbesan O, Wright T, Jones N-HY, et al.; 
T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative. 
Increasing social determinants of health screening 
rates among six endocrinology centers across the 
United States: results from the T1D Exchange 
Quality Improvement Collaborative. Clin Diabetes 
2024;42:49–55
82. Prahalad P, Ebekozien O, Alonso GT, et al.; T1D 
Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative 
Study Group. Multi-clinic quality improvement 
initiative increases continuous glucose monitoring 
use among adolescents and young adults with 
type 1 diabetes. Clin Diabetes 2021;39:264–271
83. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases. Diabetes for Health Professionals. 
Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from https:// 
www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/professionals/ 
clinical-tools-patient-management/diabetes
84. O’Connor PJ, Sperl-Hillen JM, Fazio CJ, 
Averbeck BM, Rank BH, Margolis KL. Outpatient 
diabetes clinical decision support: current status 
and future directions. Diabet Med 2016;33:734–741
85. Forsythe LP, Carman KL, Szydlowski V, et al. 
Patient engagement in research: early findings 
from The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research 
Institute. Health Aff (Millwood) 2019;38:359–367
86. Marino M, Angier H, Springer R, et al. The 
Affordable Care Act: effects of insurance on 
diabetes biomarkers. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2074–
2081
87. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Health Insurance Coverage: Early Release of 
Estimates From the National Health Interview 
Survey, January–June 2024. Accessed 4 August 
2025. Available from https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ 
data/nhis/earlyrelease/insur202412.pdf
88. Doucette ED, Salas J, Scherrer JF. Insurance 
coverage and diabetes quality indicators among 
patients in NHANES. Am J Manag Care 2016; 
22:484–490
89. Kaiser Family Foundation. 2021 Employer 
Health Benefits Survey. Accessed 8 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.kff.org/report-section/ 
ehbs-2021-summary-of-findings/#:∼:text=Twenty- 
eight%20percent%20of%20covered%20workers% 
20are%20enrolled%20in,as%20an%20indemnity% 
29%20plan%20%5B%20Figure%20D%20%5D
90. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employee 
benefits—high deductible health plans and health 
savings accounts. Accessed 8 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.bls.gov/ebs/factsheets/ 
high-deductible-health-plans-and-health-savings- 
accounts.htm
91. Garabedian LF, Zhang F, LeCates R, Wallace 
J, Ross-Degnan D, Wharam JF. Trends in high 
deductible health plan enrolment and spending 
among commercially insured members with and 
without chronic conditions: a Natural Experiment 
for Translation in Diabetes (NEXT-D2) study. BMJ 
Open 2021;11:e044198
92. Wu YM, Huang J, Reed ME. Association 
between high-deductible health plans and 
engagement in routine medical care for type 2 
diabetes in a privately insured population: a 
propensity score-matched study. Diabetes Care 
2022;45:1193–1200
93. Jiang DH, Herrin J, Van Houten HK, McCoy 
RG. Evaluation of high-deductible health plans 
and acute glycemic complications among adults 
with diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6:e2250602
94. Lu CY, Argetsinger S, Lakoma M, Zhang F, 
Wharam JF, Ross-Degnan D. Effects of adopting 
preventive drug lists on medication costs and 
disparities by income over 2 years: a Natural 
Experiment for Translation in Diabetes (NEXT-D) 
study. Diabetes Care 2025;48:341–352
95. McCoy RG, Swarna KS, Jiang DH, et al. 
Enrollment in high-deductible health plans and 
incident diabetes complications. JAMA Netw Open 
2024;7:e243394
96. Gibson DM. Estimates of the percentage of 
US adults with diabetes who could be screened 
for diabetic retinopathy in primary care settings. 
JAMA Ophthalmol 2019;137:440–444
97. Gaffney A, Himmelstein DU, Woolhandler S. 
Prevalence and correlates of patient rationing of 
insulin in the United States: a national survey. 
Ann Intern Med 2022;175:1623–1626
98. Cefalu WT, Dawes DE, Gavlak G, et al.; 
Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group. 
Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group: 
conclusions and recommendations. Diabetes Care 
2018;41:1299–1311
99. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 
Part D Senior Savings Model. Accessed 8 August 
2025. Available from https://www.cms.gov/ 
priorities/innovation/innovation-models/part- 
d-savings-model
100. Baig K, Dusetzina SB. Premiums and out-of- 
pocket spending for long-acting insulins under 
the Medicare Part D Senior Savings Model. JAMA 
2022;328:2161–2162
101. Baig KA, Fry CE, Buntin MB, Powers AC, 
Dusetzina SB. Insulin out-of-pocket spending caps 
and employer-sponsored insurance: changes in out- 
of-pocket and total costs for insulin and healthcare. 
Health Serv Res 2025:e14656
102. American Diabetes Association. State Insulin 
Copay Caps. Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from 
https://diabetes.org/tools-resources/affordable- 
insulin/state-insulin-copay-caps
103. Suran M. All 3 major insulin manufacturers 
are cutting their prices—here’s what the news 
means for patients with diabetes. JAMA 2023; 
329:1337–1339
104. American Diabetes Association. Insulin 
Cost and Affordability. Leading the Fight for 
Insulin Affordability. Accessed 8 August 2025. 
Available from https://diabetes.org/tools-support/ 
insulin-affordability
105. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Karaca-Mandic 
P, Ross JS, Montori VM, Shah ND. Second-line 
S24 
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations                                               
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
therapy for type 2 diabetes management: the 
treatment/benefit paradox of cardiovascular and 
kidney comorbidities. Diabetes Care 2021;44: 
2302–2311
106. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Deng Y, et al. 
Comparison of diabetes medications used by 
adults with commercial insurance vs Medicare 
Advantage, 2016 to 2019. JAMA Netw Open 2021; 
4:e2035792
107. Benning TJ, Heien HC, Herges JR, Creo AL, 
Al Nofal A, McCoy RG. Glucagon fill rates and cost 
among children and adolescents with type 1 
diabetes in the United States, 2011-2021. Diabetes 
Res Clin Pract 2023;206:111026
108. Herges JR, Haag JD, Kosloski-Tarpenning 
KA, Mara KC, McCoy RG. Gaps in glucagon fills 
among commercially insured patients receiving a 
glucagon prescription. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 
2023;200:110720
109. Patel PM, Thomas D, Liu Z, Aldrich-Renner 
S, Clemons M, Patel BV. Systematic review of 
disparities in continuous glucose monitoring and 
insulin pump utilization in the United States: key 
themes and evidentiary gaps. Diabetes Obes 
Metab 2024;26:4293–4301
110. Eberly LA, Yang L, Essien UR, et al. Racial, 
ethnic, and socioeconomic inequities in glucagon- 
like peptide-1 receptor agonist use among patients 
with diabetes in the US. JAMA Health Forum 
2021;2:e214182
111. Essien UR, Singh B, Swabe G, et al. 
Association of prescription co-payment with 
adherence to glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor 
agonist and sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 
inhibitor therapies in patients with heart 
failure and diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6: 
e2316290
112. Taha MB, Valero-Elizondo J, Yahya T, et al. 
Cost-related medication nonadherence in adults 
with diabetes in the United States: the National 
Health Interview Survey 2013–2018. Diabetes Care 
2022;45:594–603
113. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 
CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022–2032. 
Accessed 8 August 2025. Available from https:// 
www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-framework- 
health-equity.pdf
114. Washington AE, Lipstein SH. The Patient- 
Centered Outcomes Research Institute–promoting 
better information, decisions, and health. N Engl J 
Med 2011;365:e31
115. Dixon B, Peña M-M, Taveras EM. Lifecourse 
approach to racial/ethnic disparities in childhood 
obesity. Adv Nutr 2012;3:73–82
116. Egede LE, Walker RJ, Linde S, et al. 
Nonmedical interventions for type 2 diabetes: 
evidence, actionable strategies, and policy 
opportunities. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41: 
963–970
117. Jiang DH, O’Connor PJ, Huguet N, Golden 
SH, McCoy RG. Modernizing diabetes care quality 
measures. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:955–
962
118. Joint Commission. R3 Report. Requirement, 
Rationale, Reference. Accessed 11 September 2025. 
Available from https://digitalassets.jointcommission 
.org/api/public/content/e57b92c0e6854a03b27302 
663b5c1084?v=cec3044d&_gl=1*1xqrmfh*_ga*Lg 
.*_ga_K31T0BHP4T*czE3NTQ0OTIwNDYkbzEkZz 
EkdDE3NTQ0OTIxNTUkajU5JGwwJGgw
119. National Committee for Quality Assurance. 
Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information 
Set (HEDIS-MY) 2024. Accessed 6 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.ncqa.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/HEDIS-MY-2024-Measure-Description.pdf
120. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 
Quality Payment Program. Explore Measures & 
Activities. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available 
from https://qpp.cms.gov/mips/explore-measures
121. Ebekozien O, Mungmode A, Buckingham D, 
et al. Achieving equity in diabetes research: 
borrowing from the field of quality improvement 
using a practical framework and improvement 
tools. Diabetes Spectr 2022;35:304–312
122. Odugbesan O, Addala A, Nelson G, et al. 
Implicit racial-ethnic and insurance-mediated bias 
to recommending diabetes technology: insights 
from T1D Exchange Multicenter Pediatric and 
Adult Diabetes Provider Cohort. Diabetes Technol 
Ther 2022;24:619–627
123. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 
Ensuring Proper Use of Electronic Health Record 
Features and Capabilities. 2016. Accessed 6 August 
2025. Available from https://www.cms.gov/files/ 
document/ehrdecisiontable062816pdf
124. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. Secretary’s Advisory Committee on National 
Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives 
for 2030. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from 
https://health.gov/healthypeople
125. National Academy of Sciences. A Framework 
for Educating Health Professionals to Address the 
Social Determinants of Health. 2016. Accessed 
6 August 2025. Available from https://www.ncbi. 
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27854400
126. Zakaria NI, Tehranifar P, Laferrère B, Albrecht 
SS. Racial and ethnic disparities in glycemic control 
among insured US adults. JAMA Netw Open 
2023;6:e2336307
127. Hershey JA, Morone J, Lipman TH, Hawkes CP. 
Social determinants of health, goals and outcomes 
in high-risk children with type 1 diabetes. Can J 
Diabetes 2021;45:444–450.e1
128. Walker RJ, Strom Williams J, Egede LE. 
Influence of race, ethnicity and social determinants 
of health on diabetes outcomes. Am J Med Sci 
2016;351:366–373
129. Hashemi R, Rabizadeh S, Yadegar A, et al. 
High prevalence of comorbidities in older adult 
patients with type 2 diabetes: a cross-sectional 
survey. BMC Geriatr 2024;24:873
130. Huang ES. Management of diabetes mellitus 
in older people with comorbidities. BMJ 2016; 
353:i2200
131. O’Gurek DT, Henke C. A practical approach 
to screening for social determinants of health. 
Fam Pract Manag 2018;25:7–12
132. Yan AF, Chen Z, Wang Y, et al. Effectiveness 
of social needs screening and interventions in 
clinical settings on utilization, cost, and clinical 
outcomes: a systematic review. Health Equity 
2022;6:454–475
133. Rabbitt MP, Hales LJ, Burke MP, Coleman- 
Jensen A. Household Food Security in the United 
States in 2022 (Report No. ERR-325). U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research 
Service, 2023. Accessed 11 September 2025. 
Available from https://search.nal.usda.gov/ 
discovery/fulldisplay?context=L&vid=01NAL_ 
INST:MAIN&docid=alma-9916411232407426
134. Kirby JB, Bernard D, Liang L. The prevalence 
of food insecurity is highest among Americans for 
whom diet is most critical to health. Diabetes 
Care 2021;44:e131–e132
135. Levi R, Bleich SN, Seligman HK. Food 
insecurity and diabetes: overview of intersections 
and potential dual solutions. Diabetes Care 2023; 
46:1599–1608
136. Alawode O, Humble S, Herrick CJ. Food 
insecurity, SNAP participation and glycemic control 
in low-income adults with predominantly type 2 
diabetes: a cross-sectional analysis using NHANES 
2007-2018 data. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 
2023;11:e003205
137. Hager ER, Quigg AM, Black MM, et al. 
Development and validity of a 2-item screen to 
identify families at risk for food insecurity. Pediatrics 
2010;126:e26–e32
138. Little M, Rosa E, Heasley C, Asif A, Dodd W, 
Richter A. Promoting healthy food access and 
nutrition in primary care: a systematic scoping 
review of food prescription programs. Am J Health 
Promot 2022;36:518–536
139. Berkowitz SA, Meigs JB, DeWalt D, et al. 
Material need insecurities, control of diabetes 
mellitus, and use of health care resources: results 
of the Measuring Economic Insecurity in Diabetes 
study. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:257–265
140. Reid LA, Mendoza JA, Merchant AT, et al. 
Household food insecurity is associated with 
diabetic ketoacidosis but not severe hypoglycemia 
or glycemic control in youth and young adults with 
youth-onset type 2 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 
2022;23:982–990
141. White BM, Logan A, Magwood GS. Access 
to diabetes care for populations experiencing 
homelessness: an integrated review. Curr Diab 
Rep 2016;16:112
142. Stahre M, VanEenwyk J, Siegel P, Njai R. 
Housing insecurity and the association with health 
outcomes and unhealthy behaviors, Washington 
State, 2011. Prev Chronic Dis 2015;12:E109
143. Bernstein RS, Meurer LN, Plumb EJ, Jackson 
JL. Diabetes and hypertension prevalence in 
homeless adults in the United States: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Am J Public Health 
2015;105:e46–e60
144. Montgomery AE, Fargo JD, Kane V, Culhane 
DP. Development and validation of an instrument 
to assess imminent risk of homelessness among 
veterans. Public Health Rep 2014;129:428–436
145. Baxter AJ, Tweed EJ, Katikireddi SV, Thomson 
H. Effects of housing first approaches on health 
and well-being of adults who are homeless or at 
risk of homelessness: systematic review and meta- 
analysis of randomised controlled trials. J Epidemiol 
Community Health 2019;73:379–387
146. Al-Rousan T, AlHeresh R, Saadi A, et al. 
Epidemiology of cardiovascular disease and its 
risk factors among refugees and asylum seekers: 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol 
Cardiovasc Risk Prev 2022;12:200126
147. Jaung MS, Willis R, Sharma P, et al. Models 
of care for patients with hypertension and 
diabetes in humanitarian crises: a systematic 
review. Health Policy Plan 2021;36:509–532
148. Olson RM, Nolan CP, Limaye N, Osei M, 
Palazuelos D. National prevalence of diabetes 
and barriers to care among U.S. farmworkers and 
association with migrant worker status. Diabetes 
Care 2023;46:2188–2192
149. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National 
Agricultural Statistics Service. Census of Agriculture. 
2022 Census Full Report. Accessed 6 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.nass.usda.gov/ 
Publications/AgCensus/2022/index.php#full_report
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                    
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations
S25 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
150. Soto S, Yoder AM, Aceves B, Nuño T, 
Sepulveda R, Rosales CB. Determining regional 
differences in barriers to accessing health care 
among farmworkers using the National Agricultural 
Workers Survey. J Immigr Minor Health 2023;25: 
324–330
151. Thonon F, Perrot S, Yergolkar AV, et al. 
Electronic tools to bridge the language gap in 
health care for people who have migrated: 
systematic review. J Med Internet Res 2021;23: 
e25131
152. U.S. Department of Health & Human 
Services. National Standards for Culturally and 
Linguistically Appropriate Services (CLAS) in 
Health and Health Care. Accessed 6 August 
2025. Available from https://thinkculturalhealth 
.hhs.gov/assets/pdfs/EnhancedNationalCLAS 
Standards_Revised_June2025.pdf
153. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Health Literacy. Talking Points About Health 
Literacy. Accessed 06 August 2025. Available from 
https://www.cdc.gov/health-literacy/php/about/ 
tell-others.html
154. Nutbeam D, Lloyd JE. Understanding and 
responding to health literacy as a social determinant 
of health. Annu Rev Public Health 2021;42:159–173
155. Marciano L, Camerini A-L, Schulz PJ. The 
role of health literacy in diabetes knowledge, self- 
care, and glycemic control: a meta-analysis. J Gen 
Intern Med 2019;34:1007–1017
156. Schaffler J, Leung K, Tremblay S, et al. The 
effectiveness of self-management interventions 
for individuals with low health literacy and/or 
low income: a descriptive systematic review. J 
Gen Intern Med 2018;33:510–523
157. Butayeva J, Ratan ZA, Downie S, Hosseinzadeh 
H. The impact of health literacy interventions on 
glycemic control and self-management outcomes 
among type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic 
review. J Diabetes 2023;15:724–735
158. Baumeister A, Aldin A, Chakraverty D, et al. 
Interventions for improving health literacy in 
migrants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023;11: 
CD013303
159. Schapira MM, Fletcher KE, Gilligan MA, et al. 
A framework for health numeracy: how patients 
use quantitative skills in health care. J Health 
Commun 2008;13:501–517
160. Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality. Clinical-community linkages. Accessed 
6 August 2025. Available from https://archive. 
ahrq.gov/ncepcr/tools/community/index.html
161. Herges JR, Matulis JC, Kessler ME, 
Ruehmann LL, Mara KC, McCoy RG. Evaluation of 
an enhanced primary care team model to improve 
diabetes care. Ann Fam Med 2022;20:505–511
162. Kasper AL, Myers LA, Carlson PN, et al. 
Diabetes management for community paramedics: 
development and implementation of a novel 
curriculum. Diabetes Spectr 2022;35:367–376
163. Evans J, White P, Ha H. Evaluating the 
effectiveness of community health worker 
interventions on glycaemic control in type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet 2023;402(Suppl 1):S40
164. Ducharme-Smith A, Juntunen M, Espinoza A, 
et al. Pilot pragmatic trial of a community 
paramedic diabetes self-management education 
program for adults with diabetes. Diabetes Care 
2025;48:2089–2094
165. Azmiardi A, Murti B, Febrinasari RP, 
Tamtomo DG. The effect of peer support in 
diabetes self-management education on glycemic 
control in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiol 
Health 2021;43:e2021090
166. Fisher EB, Boothroyd RI, Elstad EA, et al. 
Peer support of complex health behaviors in 
prevention and disease management with special 
reference to diabetes: systematic reviews. Clin 
Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;3:4
167. Foster G, Taylor SJC, Eldridge SE, Ramsay J, 
Griffiths CJ. Self-management education pro- 
grammes by lay leaders for people with chronic 
conditions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007: 
CD005108
168. Piatt GA, Rodgers EA, Xue L, Zgibor JC. 
Integration and utilization of peer leaders for 
diabetes self-management support: results from 
Project SEED (Support, Education, and Evaluation 
in Diabetes). Diabetes Educ 2018;44:373–382
169. Rosenthal EL, Rush CH, Allen CG. Under- 
standing scope and competencies: a contemporary 
look at the United States community health worker 
field: progress report of the Community Health 
Worker (CHW) Core Consensus (C3) Project: 
building national consensus on CHW core roles, 
skills, and qualities. CHW Central, 2016. Accessed 
6 August 2025. Available from https://files 
.ctctcdn.com/a907c850501/1c1289f0-88cc-49c3- 
a238-66def942c147.pdf
170. Guide to Community Preventive Services. 
Community health workers help patients 
manage diabetes. Updated 25 October 2022. 
Accessed 06 August 2025. Available from https:// 
www.thecommunityguide.org/content/community- 
health-workers-help-patients-manage-diabetes
171. Cuellar AE, Calonge BN. The Community 
Preventive Services Task Force: 25 years of 
effectiveness, economics, and equity. Am J Prev 
Med 2022;62:e371–e373
S26 
Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations                                               
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S13/848832/dc26s001.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
