17. DIABETES ADVOCACY
17. Diabetes Advocacy: Standards 
of Care in Diabetes—2026
Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S356–S357 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S017
American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for 
Diabetes*
*A complete list of members of the American 
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee 
for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/10.23 
37/dc26-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each contributor 
is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 
17. Diabetes advocacy: Standards of Care in 
Diabetes—2026. Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1): 
S356–S357
© 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. 
Readers may use this work for educational, 
noncommercial purposes if properly cited and 
unaltered. The version of record may be linked 
at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA 
permission is required to post this work on any 
third-party site or platform. This publication and 
its contents may not be reproduced, distributed, 
or used for text or data mining, machine learning, 
or similar technologies without prior written 
permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute 
this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes. 
org. More information is available at https:// 
diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” in­
cludes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to 
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide­
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional 
Practice Committee for Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are re­
sponsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as war­
ranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as 
well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations 
and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction 
and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are 
invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
Managing the daily health demands of diabetes can be challenging. People living 
with diabetes should not have to face discrimination due to diabetes. By advocat­
ing for the rights of those with diabetes at all levels, the American Diabetes Associ­
ation (ADA) can help to ensure that they live a healthy and productive life. A 
strategic goal of the ADA is for more children, adolescents, and adults with diabe­
tes to live free from the burden of discrimination. The ADA is also focused on mak­
ing sure cost is not a barrier to successful diabetes management.
One tactic for achieving these goals has been to implement the ADA “Standards of 
Care in Diabetes” through advocacy-oriented statements. The ADA publishes evi­
dence-based, peer-reviewed statements on topics such as diabetes and employment, 
diabetes and driving, insulin access and affordability, and diabetes management in 
certain settings such as schools, childcare programs, and detention facilities. In addi­
tion to the ADA’s clinical documents, these advocacy statements are important tools 
in educating schools, employers, licensing agencies, policymakers, and others about 
the intersection of diabetes management and the law and for providing scientifically 
supported policy recommendations.
ADVOCACY STATEMENTS
The following is a partial list of advocacy statements ordered by publication date, with 
the most recent statement appearing first. A comprehensive list of advocacy statements 
is available at professional.diabetes.org/content/key-statements-and-reports.
Diabetes Care in the School Setting
A sizable portion of a child’s day is spent in school, so close communication with 
and training and cooperation of school personnel are essential to optimize diabetes 
management, safety, and access to all school-sponsored opportunities. Additionally, 
the statement further details optimal use of technologies, management of diabetes, 
behavioral health considerations, and guidance for diabetes care in special situations 
(e.g., emergency situations or clinical trial participation). Refer to the published ADA 
S356                                                                                                                    
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026                           
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S356/848828/dc26s017.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
statement for diabetes management 
information for students with diabetes 
in elementary and secondary school 
settings (1).
Diabetes and Driving
People with diabetes who wish to oper­
ate on-road motor vehicles are subject 
to various licensing requirements applied 
by both state and federal jurisdictions. 
For an overview of existing licensing 
rules for people with diabetes, factors 
that impact driving for this population, 
diabetes technology use, and general 
guidelines for assessing driver fitness 
and determining appropriate licensing 
restrictions, refer to the published ADA 
statement (2).
Diabetes Management in Detention 
Facilities
People with diabetes who are in deten­
tion facilities deserve equitable care that 
meets national standards. As many facili­
ties differ and have unique challenges, 
written policies and procedures are es­
sential to create a solid foundation and 
infrastructure for diabetes management 
and the training of medical and security 
staff. Policies should address considerations 
such as security needs, transfers, access to 
medical personnel, needed supplies and 
equipment, and empowering diabetes 
self-management. For a comprehensive 
discussion on these considerations, re­
fer to the published ADA statement (3).
Care of Young Children With 
Diabetes in the Childcare and 
Community Setting
Very young children (aged <5 years) with 
diabetes have legal protections and can 
be safely cared for by childcare professio­
nals with appropriate training, access to 
resources, and a communication system 
with parents or guardians and the child’s 
diabetes health care professional. Refer 
to the published ADA advocacy state­
ment for information on young chil­
dren aged <5 years in settings such as 
childcare centers, preschools, camps, and 
other programs (4).
Insulin Access and Affordability
The ADA’s Insulin Access and Affordability 
Working Group compiled public informa­
tion and convened a series of meetings 
with stakeholders throughout the insulin 
supply chain to learn how each entity af­
fects the cost of insulin for the consumer. 
Their conclusions and recommendations 
are published in an ADA statement (5).
Diabetes and Employment
Any person with diabetes, whether in­
sulin treated or noninsulin treated, 
should be eligible for any employment 
for which they are otherwise qualified. 
Employment decisions should never 
be based on generalizations or stereo­
types regarding the effects of diabetes. 
For a general set of guidelines for evalu­
ating individuals with diabetes for em­
ployment, including how an assessment 
should be performed and what changes 
(accommodations) in the workplace 
may be needed for an individual with 
diabetes, refer to the published ADA 
statement (6).
References
1. Cogen F, Rodriguez H, March CA, et al. 
Diabetes care in the school setting: a statement of 
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 
2024;47:2050–2061
2. Cox DJ, Frier BM, Bruggeman B, et al. 
Diabetes and driving: a statement of the American 
Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2024;47: 
1889–1896
3. Lorber DL, ElSayed NA, Bannuru RR, et al. 
Diabetes management in detention facilities: a 
statement of the American Diabetes Association. 
Diabetes Care 2024;47:544–555
4. March C, Sherman J, Bannuru RR, et al. Care 
of young children with diabetes in the childcare and 
community setting: a statement of the American 
Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2023;46: 
2102–2111
5. Cefalu WT, Dawes DE, Gavlak G, et al.; Insulin 
Access and Affordability Working Group. Insulin 
Access and Affordability Working Group: 
conclusions and recommendations [published 
correction appears in Diabetes Care 2018;41: 
1831]. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1299–1311
6. Anderson JE, Greene MA, Griffin JW, Jr, et al.; 
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes and 
employment. Diabetes Care 2014;37(Suppl. 1): 
S112–S117
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                                                             
Diabetes Advocacy
S357 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S356/848828/dc26s017.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
