4. COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL EVALUATION AND ASSESSMENT OF COMORBIDITIES
4. Comprehensive Medical
Evaluation and Assessment of
Comorbidities: Standards of Care
in Diabetes—2026
Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S61–S88 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S004
American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for 
Diabetes*
*A complete list of members of the American 
Diabetes Association Professional Practice
Committee for Diabetes can be found at https:// 
doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each contributor 
is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 
4. Comprehensive medical evaluation and 
assessment of comorbidities: Standards of Care 
in Diabetes—2026. Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1): 
S61–S88
The BONE HEALTH subsection has received endorsement 
from the American Society for Bone and Mineral 
Research.
© 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. 
Readers may use this work for educational, 
noncommercial purposes if properly cited and 
unaltered. The version of record may be linked 
at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA 
permission is required to post this work on any 
third-party site or platform. This publication and its 
contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or 
used for text or data mining, machine learning, 
or similar technologies without prior written 
permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute 
this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes 
.org. More information is available at https:// 
diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” in­
cludes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to 
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide­
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional 
Practice Committee for Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are re­
sponsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as war­
ranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as 
well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations 
and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to 
Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards 
of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
PERSON-CENTERED COLLABORATIVE CARE
Recommendations
4.1 A communication style that uses person-centered, culturally sensitive, and 
strength-based language and active listening; elicits individual preferences and be­
liefs; and assesses literacy, numeracy, and potential barriers to care should be 
used to optimize health outcomes and health-related quality of life. B
4.2 People with diabetes can benefit from a coordinated interprofessional 
team that may include but is not limited to diabetes care and education special­
ists, primary care and subspecialty clinicians, nurses, registered dietitian nutrition­
ists, exercise specialists, pharmacists, dentists, podiatrists, and behavioral health 
professionals. C
A successful medical evaluation and care plan depends on the beneficial interac­
tions and care coordination between the person with diabetes and the care team. 
The Chronic Care Model (1) and other evidence-based care delivery models (see 
section 1, “Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations”) can support a 
person-centered approach to care that requires a close working relationship be­
tween the person with diabetes, their clinicians, and the broader health care team 
involved in treatment planning and implementation. People with diabetes should 
receive health care from a coordinated interprofessional team that may include 
but is not limited to diabetes care and education specialists, primary care and sub­
specialty clinicians, nurses, registered dietitian nutritionists, exercise specialists, 
pharmacists, dentists, podiatrists, behavioral health professionals, and community 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026
S61
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
partners such as community health workers 
and community paramedics. Individuals 
with diabetes and their care partners or 
caregivers must assume an active role in 
their care. Based on the preferences and 
values of the person with diabetes, elicited 
by the care team, the person with diabetes, 
their family or support group, and the 
health care team together formulate the 
management plan, which includes lifestyle 
management (see section 5, “Facilitating 
Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
to Improve Health Outcomes”) and 
pharmacotherapy, as appropriate.
The goals of treatment for diabetes 
are to prevent or delay complications 
and optimize quality of life (Fig. 4.1). 
Treatment goals and plans should be 
cocreated by the care team and people 
with diabetes based on their individual 
preferences, values, and goals. This indi­
vidualized management plan should take 
into account the person’s age, cognitive 
abilities, school/work schedule and condi­
tions, health beliefs, support systems, 
eating patterns, physical activity, social 
situation, financial concerns, cultural fac­
tors, literacy and numeracy (mathemati­
cal literacy), diabetes history (duration, 
complications, and current use of medi­
cations), comorbidities, disabilities, health 
priorities, other medical conditions, pref­
erences for care, access to health care 
services, and life expectancy. People liv­
ing with diabetes should be engaged in 
conversation about these aspects of their 
lives and diabetes management, with 
routine reassessment as necessary given 
their changing circumstances across the 
life span. Various strategies and techniques 
should be used to support the person’s 
self-management efforts, including pro­
viding education on problem-solving and 
coping skills for all aspects of diabetes 
management.
GOALS 
OF CARE
s
REVIEW AND AGREE ON 
MANAGEMENT PLAN
• Review management plan
• Mutually agree on changes
• Ensure agreed modification of therapy is
implemented in a timely fashion to avoid
therapeutic inertia
• Undertake decision cycle regularly (at least
once or twice a year)
• Operate in an integrated system of care
• Ensure access to DSMES
• Involve an educated and informed person (and
the individual’s family or caregiver)
• Explore personal preferences
• Language matters (include person-first,
strengths-based, empowering language)
• Include motivational interviewing, goal setting,
and shared decision-making
PROVIDE ONGOING SUPPORT 
AND MONITORING OF:
• Emotional well-being
• Lifestyle and health behaviors
• Tolerability of medications
• Surrogate measures of treatment,
including BGM and CGM, weight, step
count, A1C, BP, and lipids
AGREE ON MANAGEMENT PLAN
• Specify SMART goals:
‒ Specific
‒ Measurable
‒ Achievable
‒ Realistic
‒ Time limited
ASSESS KEY PERSON CHARACTERISTICS
• The individual’s preferences, values, and goals
• Current lifestyle and health behaviors
• Comorbidities (i.e., CVD, CKD, and HF)
• Clinical characteristics (i.e., age, A1C, and weight)
• Mental health, cognition and functional status
• Social determinants of health
CONSIDER SPECIFIC 
FACTORS THAT IMPACT 
CHOICE OF TREATMENT
• Individualized glycemic and weight goals
• Impact on weight, hypoglycemia,
cardiovascular and kidney protection,
and MASLD
• Underlying physiological factors
• Side effect profiles of medications
• Complexity of treatment plan (i.e.,
frequency and mode of administration)
• Treatment choice to optimize
medication use and reduce treatment
discontinuation
• Access, cost and availability of
medication(s), and lifestyle choices
Decision cycle for person-centered glycemic 
management in type 2 diabetes
IMPLEMENT 
MANAGEMENT PLAN
• Ensure there is regular review; more
frequent contact initially is often
desirable for DSMES
USE SHARED DECISION-MAKING TO 
CO-CREATE A MANAGEMENT PLAN
Figure 4.1—Decision cycle for person-centered glycemic management in type 2 diabetes. BGM, blood glucose monitoring; BP, blood pressure; 
CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; DSMES, diabetes self-management education and 
support; HF, heart failure. MASLD, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease. Adapted from Davies et al. (307). 
Communication between health care 
professionals and people with diabetes 
and their families should acknowledge 
that multiple factors impact diabetes 
management but also emphasize that 
collaboratively developed treatment plans 
and a healthy lifestyle can significantly im­
prove disease outcomes and well-being 
(2). Thus, the goal of communication 
between health care professionals and 
people with diabetes is to establish a 
collaborative relationship and to assess 
and address self-management barriers 
without blaming people with diabetes 
for “noncompliance” or “nonadherence” 
S62 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
when the outcomes of self-management 
are not optimal (3). The familiar terms 
noncompliance and nonadherence denote 
a passive, obedient role for a person with 
diabetes in “following doctor’s orders,” 
which is at odds with the active role peo­
ple with diabetes take in the day-to-day 
decision-making, planning, monitoring, 
evaluation, and problem-solving involved 
in diabetes self-management. Using a 
nonjudgmental approach that normalizes 
periodic lapses in management may help 
minimize the person’s resistance to re­
porting problems with self-management. 
Empathizing and using active listening 
techniques, such as open-ended questions, 
reflective statements, and summarizing 
what the person said, can help facilitate 
communication. Perceptions of people 
with diabetes about their own ability, or 
self-efficacy, to self-manage diabetes 
constitute one important psychosocial 
factor related to improved diabetes 
self-management and treatment out­
comes in diabetes (4) and should be a 
goal of ongoing assessment, education, 
and treatment planning.
Language has a strong impact on per­
ceptions and behavior. Empowering lan­
guage can help to inform and motivate, 
while shame and judgement can be dis­
couraging. The American Diabetes Asso­
ciation (ADA) and the Association of 
Diabetes Care & Education Specialists 
(ADCES) (formerly called the American 
Association of Diabetes Educators) joint 
consensus report, “The Use of Language 
in Diabetes Care and Education,” provides 
the authors’ expert opinion regarding the 
use of language by health care professio­
nals when speaking or writing about dia­
betes for people with diabetes or for 
professional audiences (3,5). Although fur­
ther research is needed to address the im­
pact of language on diabetes outcomes, 
the report includes five key consensus rec­
ommendations for language use: 
• Use language that is neutral, non­
judgmental, and based on facts, ac­
tions, physiology, or biology.
• Use language free from stigma.
• Use language that is strength based, 
respectful, and inclusive and that 
imparts hope.
• Use language that fosters collabora­
tion between people with diabetes 
and health care professionals.
• Use language that is person cen­
tered (e.g., “person with diabetes” is 
preferred over “diabetic”).
COMPREHENSIVE MEDICAL 
EVALUATION
Recommendations
4.3 A complete medical evaluation 
should be performed at the initial visit 
and follow-up, as appropriate, to:
• Confirm the diagnosis and classify 
diabetes. A
• Assess glycemic status and previ­
ous and current treatment. A
• Evaluate for diabetes complications, 
potential comorbid conditions, 
and overall health status. A
• Identify care partners, support sys­
tems, and available resources. E
• Assess social determinants of health 
and structural barriers to optimal 
health and health care. A
• Review risk factor management in 
the person with diabetes. A
• Begin engagement with the person 
with diabetes in the formulation of 
a care management plan including 
goals of care. A
• Develop a plan for continuing care. A
4.4 Ongoing management should be 
guided by the assessment of overall 
health and functional status, diabetes 
complications, cardiovascular risk, hy­
poglycemia risk, and shared decision 
making to set therapeutic goals. B
The comprehensive medical evaluation 
includes the initial and follow-up evalua­
tions, which comprise assessment of 
complications, psychosocial assessment, 
management of comorbid conditions, 
overall health, functional and cognitive 
status, and engagement of the person 
with diabetes throughout the process. 
While a comprehensive list is provided 
in Table 4.1, in clinical practice the health 
care professional may need to prioritize 
select components of the medical evalua­
tion given the available resources and 
time. Engaging other members of the 
health care team can also support com­
prehensive diabetes care. The goal of 
these recommendations is to provide 
the health care team with guidance 
and information so it can optimally sup­
port people with diabetes and their 
care partners. In addition to the medi­
cal history, physical examination, and 
laboratory tests, health care professionals 
should assess diabetes self-management 
behaviors, nutrition, social determinants 
of health, and psychosocial health (see 
section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health 
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve 
Health Outcomes”) and give guidance on 
routine immunizations. The assessment 
of sleep pattern and duration, bone 
health, and sexual health should also be 
considered as an important part of the 
comprehensive evaluation of a person 
with diabetes. Follow-up visits should oc­
cur at least every 3–6 months individual­
ized to the person and then at least 
annually.
Lifestyle management and behavioral 
health care are cornerstones of diabetes 
management. People with diabetes should 
be referred for diabetes self-management 
education and support, medical nutrition 
therapy, and assessment of behavioral 
health concerns as appropriate. People with 
diabetes should receive recommended 
preventive care services (e.g., immuni­
zations and age- and sex-appropriate 
cancer screening); tobacco use cessa­
tion counseling; and ophthalmological, 
dental, podiatric, and other referrals, as 
needed.
The assessment of risk of acute and 
chronic diabetes complications and treat­
ment planning are key components of 
initial and follow-up visits (Table 4.2). The 
risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) and heart failure (see 
section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and 
Risk Management”), chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) staging (see section 11, “Chronic 
Kidney Disease and Risk Management”), 
presence of retinopathy and neuropathy 
(see section 12, “Retinopathy, Neuropathy, 
and Foot Care”), and risk of treatment- 
associated hypoglycemia should be used to 
individualize goals for glycemia (see section 
6, “Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hy- 
perglycemic Crises”), blood pressure, and lip­
ids and to select specific glucose-lowering 
medication(s) (see section 9, “Pharmacologic 
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”), antihy­
pertension medications, and lipid lowering 
treatment intensity.
Additional referrals should be ar­
ranged as necessary (Table 4.2). Clini­
cians should ensure that people with 
diabetes are appropriately screened for 
complications, comorbidities, and treat­
ment burden. Glycemic management is 
a part, not the sole goal, of the clinical 
encounter.
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S63 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 4.1—Components of the comprehensive diabetes medical evaluation at 
initial, follow-up, and annual visits
Visit
Initial Every follow-up
Annual
Past medical and family history
-
-
-
Diabetes history
-
-
-
• Characteristics at onset (e.g., age and symptoms 
and/or signs)
✓
-
-
• Review of previous treatment plans and response
✓
-
-
• Assess frequency, cause, and severity of past 
hospitalizations
✓
-
-
Family history
-
-
-
• Family history of diabetes in a first-degree relative
✓
-
-
• Family history of autoimmune disorders
✓
-
-
Personal history of complications and common 
comorbidities
-
-
-
• Common comorbidities (e.g., obesity, OSA, and 
MASLD)
✓
-
✓
• High blood pressure or abnormal lipids
✓
-
✓
• Macrovascular and microvascular complications
✓
-
✓
• Hypoglycemia: awareness, frequency, causes, and 
timing of episodes
✓
✓
✓
• Presence of hemoglobinopathies or anemias
✓
-
✓
• Last dental visit 
• Last foot exam
✓  
✓
-
✓  
✓
• Last dilated eye exam
✓
-
✓
• Visits to specialists
✓
-
-
• Disability assessment and use of assistive devices 
(e.g., physical, cognitive, vision and auditory, history 
of fractures, and podiatry)
✓
✓
✓
• Personal history of autoimmune disease
✓
-
-
Surgical and procedure history
-
-
-
• Surgeries (e.g., metabolic surgery and 
transplantation)
✓
✓
✓
Interval history
-
-
-
• Changes in medical or family history since last visit
-
✓
✓
Behavioral factors
-
-
-
• Physical activity, sleep behaviors, eating patterns and 
weight history
✓
✓
✓
• Assess familiarity with carbohydrate counting (e.g., 
type 1 diabetes or type 2 diabetes treated with MDI)
✓
-
✓
• Screen for OSA
✓
✓
✓
• Tobacco, alcohol, and substance use
✓
-
✓
Medications and vaccinations
-
-
-
• Current medication plan
✓
✓
✓
• Medication-taking behavior, including rationing of 
medications and/or medical equipment
✓
✓
✓
• Medication intolerance or side effects
✓
✓
✓
• Complementary and alternative medicine use
✓
✓
✓
• Vaccination history and needs
✓
-
✓
Technology use
-
-
-
• Assess use of health apps, online education, patient 
portals, etc.
✓
✓
✓
• Glucose monitoring (meter/CGM): results and data use
✓
✓
✓
• Review insulin pump settings and use and connected 
pen and glucose data
✓
✓
✓
Social life assessment
-
-
-
Social network
-
-
-
• Identify existing social supports
✓
-
✓
• Identify surrogate decision maker and advanced care 
plan
✓
-
✓
• Identify social determinants of health (e.g., food 
security, housing stability, transportation access, 
financial security, and community safety)
✓
-
✓
IMMUNIZATIONS
Table 4.3). A
Children, adolescents, and adults with diabe­
tes should receive vaccinations accord­
ing to age-appropriate recommendations 
(6,7). The Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) provides vaccination 
schedules specifically for children, ado­
lescents, and adults with diabetes (cdc 
.gov/vaccines/). The CDC Advisory Com­
mittee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) 
makes recommendations based on its own 
review and rating of the evidence, provided 
in Table 4.3 for selected vaccinations. The 
ACIP evidence review has evolved over 
time with the adoption of Grading of Rec­
ommendations Assessment, Develop­
ment, and Evaluation (GRADE) in 2010 and 
then the Evidence to Decision or Evidence 
to Recommendation frameworks in 2020 
(8). Here, we discuss the particular im­
portance of specific vaccines.
Recommendation
4.5 Provide routinely recommended 
vaccinations for children, adolescents, 
and adults with diabetes as indicated 
by age (see 
COVID-19
People with underlying medical conditions, 
including diabetes, are more likely to be­
come severely ill with coronavirus disease 
2019 (COVID-19). COVID-19 vaccination us­
ing an appropriate number of doses of 
updated vaccines is recommended for 
everyone aged 6 months and older in 
the U.S. (6,7).
Hepatitis B
Compared with the general population, 
people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes 
have higher rates of hepatitis. Because of 
the higher likelihood of transmission of 
the disease, hepatitis B vaccine is recom­
mended for adults with diabetes aged 
<60 years. For adults aged ≥60 years, 
hepatitis B vaccine may be administered 
at the discretion of the treating clinician 
based on the person’s likelihood of ac­
quiring hepatitis B infection (6,7).
Influenza
Influenza is a common, preventable infec­
tious disease associated with high mortality 
and morbidity in vulnerable populations, in­
cluding youth, older adults, and people 
with chronic diseases. Influenza vaccination 
Continued on p. S65
S64 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 4.1—Continued 
Visit
Initial Every follow-up
Annual
• Assess daily routine and environment, including 
school or work schedules and ability to engage in 
diabetes self-management
✓
✓
✓
Physical examination
-
-
-
• Height, weight, and BMI; growth and pubertal 
development in children and adolescents
✓
✓
✓
• Blood pressure determination
✓
✓
✓
• Orthostatic blood pressure measures (when 
indicated)
✓
-
✓
• Fundoscopic examination (refer to eye specialist)
✓
-
✓
• Thyroid palpation
✓
-
✓
• Skin examination (e.g., acanthosis nigricans, insulin 
injection or insertion sites, and lipodystrophy)
✓
✓
✓
• Comprehensive foot examination, determination of 
temperature, vibration or pinprick sensation, and  
10-g monofilament exam
✓
-
✓
• Visual inspection (e.g., skin integrity, callous 
formation, foot deformity or ulcer, and toenails)*
✓
✓
✓
• Check pedal pulses and screen for PAD with ABI 
testing if a PAD diagnosis would change 
management
✓
-
✓
• Screen for depression, anxiety, diabetes distress, fear 
of hypoglycemia, and disordered eating
✓
-
✓
• Assessment for cognitive performance if indicated
✓
-
✓
• Assessment for functional performance if indicated
✓
-
✓
• Assessment for bone health (e.g., loss of height and 
kyphosis)
✓
-
✓
Laboratory evaluation
-
-
-
• A1C, if the results are not available within the past 3 
months or if earlier assessment is necessary
✓
✓
✓
• Lipid profile, including total, LDL, and HDL cholesterol 
and triglycerides‡
✓
-
-
• Liver function tests (i.e., FIB-4)‡
✓
-
✓
• Spot urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio
✓
-
✓
• Serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration 
rate§
✓
-
✓
• Thyroid-stimulating hormone in people with type 1 
diabetes‡
✓
-
✓
• Celiac disease screening in people with type 1 
diabetesjj
✓
-
-
• Vitamin B12 if taking metformin for >5 years
✓
-
✓
• CBC with platelets
✓
-
✓
• Serum potassium levels in people treated with ACE 
inhibitors, ARBs, or diuretics§
✓
-
✓
• Calcium, vitamin D, and phosphorous as appropriate
✓
-
✓
ABI, ankle brachial index; ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers; CBC, complete blood count; CGM, 
continuous glucose monitor; FIB-4, fibrosis-4 index; MASLD, metabolic-associated steatotic liver 
disease; MDI, multiple daily injections; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; PAD, peripheral arterial dis­
ease. *Should be performed at every visit in people with diabetes with sensory loss, previous 
foot ulcers, or amputations. †At 65 years of age or older. ‡May also need to be checked after 
initiation or dose changes of medications that affect these laboratory values (i.e., diabetes 
medications, blood pressure medications, cholesterol medications, or thyroid medications). §May 
be needed more frequently in people with diabetes with known chronic kidney disease or 
with changes in medications that affect kidney function and serum potassium (see Table 11.2).
jjIn people with presence of gastrointestinal symptoms, signs, laboratory manifestations, or 
clinical suspicion suggestive of celiac disease.
in people with diabetes has been found to 
significantly reduce influenza and diabetes- 
related hospital admissions (9). In people 
with diabetes, the influenza vaccine has 
been associated with lower risk of all-cause 
mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and 
cardiovascular events (10). Given the bene­
fits of the annual influenza vaccination, 
it is recommended for all individuals ≥6 
months of age who do not have a con­
traindication. The live attenuated influ­
enza vaccine, which is delivered by nasal 
spray, is an option for people who are 
2–49 years of age and are not pregnant, 
but people with chronic conditions such 
as diabetes are cautioned against taking 
the live attenuated influenza vaccine 
and are instead recommended to re­
ceive the inactive or recombinant influ­
enza vaccination. For the 2025–2026 
season, all influenza vaccines offered in 
the U.S. are trivalent (6,7).
Pneumococcal Pneumonia
Like influenza, pneumococcal pneumo­
nia is a common, preventable disease. 
People with diabetes are at increased 
risk for pneumococcal infection and 
have been reported to have a high 
risk of hospitalization and death, with 
a mortality rate as high as 50% (11). All 
people with diabetes should receive one of 
the CDC-recommended pneumococcal 
vaccines (12).
Respiratory Syncytial Virus
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a cause 
of respiratory illness in some individuals, 
including older adults. People with chronic 
conditions such as diabetes have a 
higher risk of severe illness. The U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) ap­
proved the first vaccines for prevention 
of RSV-associated lower respiratory tract 
disease in adults aged ≥60 years. The 
ACIP recommends that all adults aged 
≥75 years and adults aged 60–74 years 
who are at increased risk for severe RSV 
should receive a single dose of RSV vac­
cine (13).
ASSESSMENT OF COMORBIDITIES
Besides assessing diabetes-related compli­
cations, clinicians and people with diabetes 
need to be aware of common comorbidities 
that affect people with diabetes and that 
may complicate its management (14–16). 
Diabetes comorbidities are conditions 
that affect people with diabetes more 
often than age-matched people without 
diabetes. This section discusses the com­
mon comorbidities observed in people with 
diabetes but is not necessarily inclusive of 
all the conditions that have been reported.
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S65 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Determination of fracture risk traditionally 
has relied on measurements of bone min­
eral density (BMD) and the World Health 
Organization–defined T-score of ≤−2.5 
SD. However, it is now established that 
the consideration of other risk factors im­
proves the categorization of fracture risk 
Table 4.2—Essential components for assessment, planning, and referral
Assessing risk of diabetes complications 
• ASCVD and heart failure history 
• ASCVD risk factors and 10-year ASCVD risk assessment 
• Staging of chronic kidney disease (see Table 11.2) 
• Hypoglycemia risk (see section 6, “Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises”) 
• Assessment for retinopathy 
• Assessment for neuropathy 
• Assessment for MASLD and MASH 
Goal setting 
• Set A1C, blood glucose, and time-in-range goals 
• Set lipid goal 
• If hypertension is present, establish blood pressure goal 
• Weight management and physical activity goals 
• Diabetes self-management goals 
Therapeutic treatment plans 
• Lifestyle management (e.g., registered dietitian nutritionist) 
• Pharmacologic therapy: glucose lowering 
• Pharmacologic therapy: cardiovascular and kidney disease risk factors 
• Weight management with pharmacotherapy or metabolic surgery, as appropriate 
• Use of glucose monitoring and insulin delivery devices 
• Referral to diabetes education and medical specialists (as needed) 
Referrals for initial care management 
• Eye care professional for annual dilated eye exam 
• Family planning for individuals of childbearing potential 
• Registered dietitian nutritionist for medical nutrition therapy 
• Diabetes self-management education and support 
• Dentist for comprehensive dental and periodontal examination 
• Behavioral health professional, if indicated 
• Audiology, if indicated 
• Social worker and community resources, if indicated 
• Rehabilitation medicine or another relevant health care professional for physical and 
cognitive disability evaluation, if indicated 
• Other appropriate health care professionals 
Assessment and treatment planning are essential components of initial and all follow-up vis­
its. ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; MASH, metabolic dysfunction-associated 
steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease.
Autoimmune Diseases
People with type 1 diabetes are at in­
creased risk for other autoimmune 
diseases, with thyroid disease, celiac 
disease, and pernicious anemia (vitamin 
B12 deficiency) being among the most 
common (17). Other autoimmune con­
ditions associated with type 1 diabetes 
include autoimmune liver disease, primary 
adrenal insufficiency (Addison disease), 
vitiligo, collagen vascular diseases, and 
myasthenia gravis (18,19). Type 1 diabe­
tes may also occur with other autoim­
mune diseases in the context of specific 
genetic disorders such as polyglandular 
autoimmune syndromes (20). Given the 
high prevalence, nonspecific symptoms, 
and insidious onset of primary hypothy­
roidism, routine screening for thyroid 
dysfunction is recommended for all peo­
ple with type 1 diabetes. Screening for 
celiac disease should be considered in 
adults with diabetes with suggestive symp­
toms (e.g., diarrhea, malabsorption, and 
abdominal pain) or signs (e.g., osteo­
porosis, vitamin deficiencies, and iron 
deficiency anemia) (21). Measurement of 
vitamin B12 levels (and reflex methylma­
lonic acid) should be considered for 
people with type 1 diabetes and pe­
ripheral neuropathy or unexplained 
anemia.
Recommendations
4.6 Screen people with type 1 diabe­
tes for autoimmune thyroid disease 
soon after diagnosis and thereafter 
at repeated intervals if clinically indi­
cated. B
4.7 Adults with type 1 diabetes should 
be screened for celiac disease in the 
presence of gastrointestinal symp­
toms, signs, laboratory manifesta­
tions, or clinical suspicion suggestive 
of celiac disease. B
Bone Health
Recommendations
4.8 Assess fracture risk in older adults 
with diabetes as a part of routine care 
in diabetes clinical practice, according 
to risk factors and comorbidities. A
4.9 Monitor bone mineral density 
using dual-energy X-ray absorptiome­
try in older adults with diabetes (aged 
≥65 years) and younger individuals 
with diabetes and multiple risk factors 
every 2–3 years (Table 4.4). A
4.10 Consider the potential adverse 
impact on skeletal health when select­
ing pharmacological options to lower 
glucose levels in people with diabetes. 
Avoiding medications with a known 
association with higher fracture risk 
(e.g., thiazolidinediones and sulfony­
lureas) is recommended, particularly 
for those at elevated risk for frac­
tures. B
4.11 To reduce the risk of falls and 
fractures, glycemic management goals 
should be individualized for people with 
diabetes at a higher risk of fracture. 
C Prioritize use of glucose-lowering 
medications that are associated with 
low risk for hypoglycemia to avoid 
falls. B
4.12 Advise people with diabetes on their 
intake of calcium (1,000–1,200 mg/day) 
and vitamin D to ensure it meets the 
recommended daily allowance for 
those at risk for fracture, either through 
their food choices or supplemental 
means. B
4.13a Consider osteoporosis drug 
therapy in older adults with diabetes 
who are at increased risk of fracture, 
including those with low bone min­
eral density (T-score ≤−2.5), history 
of fragility fracture, or elevated Frac­
ture Risk Assessment Tool score (≥3% 
for hip fracture or ≥20% for major 
osteoporotic fracture). B
4.13b Treatment may be considered 
for adults with diabetes with a T-score 
between −2.0 and −2.5 in the presence 
of additional risk factors for fracture. C
S66 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 4.3—Highly recommended immunizations for people with diabetes (from the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Vaccine
Recommended ages
Schedule
GRADE  
evidence  
type*
References
COVID-19
All people 6 months of age and 
older
Current initial vaccination 
and boosters
3
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Interim Clinical 
Considerations for Use of  
COVID-19 Vaccines in the  
United States (305)
Hepatitis B
Adults with diabetes aged  
<60 years; for adults aged 
≥60 years, hepatitis B vaccine 
may be administered at the 
discretion of the treating 
clinician based on the 
person’s likelihood of 
acquiring hepatitis B infection
-
1
Sandul et al., Updated 
Recommendation for Universal 
Hepatitis B Vaccination in Adults 
Aged 19–59 Years - United 
States, 2024 (306)
Influenza
All people with diabetes advised 
to receive a trivalent 
influenza vaccine and not to 
receive live attenuated 
influenza vaccine
Annual
3
Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Children and 
Adolescents Aged 18 Years or 
Younger - United States, 2025, 
and Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Adults Aged 19 
Years or Older - United States, 
2025 (6,7)
Pneumonia (PPSV23 
[Pneumovax])
19–64 years of age, vaccinate 
with Pneumovax
One dose is recommended 
for those who 
previously received 
PCV13; if PCV15 was 
used, follow with 
PPSV23 ≥1 year later; 
PPSV23 is not indicated 
after PCV20; adults who 
received only PPSV23 
may receive PCV15 or 
PCV20 ≥1 year after 
their last dose
2
Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Children and 
Adolescents Aged 18 Years or 
Younger - United States, 2025, 
and Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Adults Aged 19 
Years or Older - United States, 
2025 (6,7)
≥65 years of age
One dose is recommended 
for those who 
previously received 
PCV13; if PCV15 was 
used, follow with 
PPSV23 ≥1 year later; 
PPSV23 is not indicated 
after PCV20; adults who 
received only PPSV23 
may receive PCV15 or 
PCV20 ≥1 year after 
their last dose
2
Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Children and 
Adolescents Aged 18 Years or 
Younger - United States, 2025, 
and Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Adults Aged  
19 Years or Older - United 
States, 2025 (6,7)
PCV20 or PCV15
Adults 19–64 years of age with 
an immunocompromising 
condition (e.g., chronic renal 
failure), cochlear implant, or 
cerebrospinal fluid leak  
Adults 19–64 years of age, 
immunocompetent  
≥65 years of age, 
immunocompetent, have 
shared decision-making 
One dose of PCV15 or 
PCV20 is recommended 
by the Centers for 
Disease Control and 
Prevention  
For those who have 
never received any 
pneumococcal vaccine, 
the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 
2
Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Children and 
Adolescents Aged 18 Years or 
Younger - United States, 2025, 
and Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Adults Aged 19 
Continued on p. S68
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S67 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
(Table 4.4). There are factors beyond 
BMD that contribute to bone strength in 
people with diabetes.
Table 4.3—Continued 
Vaccine
Recommended ages
Schedule
GRADE  
evidence  
type*
References
discussion with health care 
professionals
recommends one dose 
of PCV15 or PCV20  
One dose of PCV15 or 
PCV20; PCSV23 may be 
given ≥8 weeks after 
PCV15; PPSV23 is not 
indicated after PCV20
Years or Older - United States, 
2025 (6,7)
RSV
Older adults ≥60 years of age 
with diabetes appear to  
be a risk group
Adults aged ≥75 years 
and those aged  
≥60 years and at high 
risk may receive a 
single dose of an RSV 
vaccine
1
Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Children and 
Adolescents Aged 18 Years or 
Younger - United States, 2025, 
and Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Adults Aged  
19 Years or Older - United 
States, 2025 (6,7)
Tetanus, diphtheria, 
pertussis (Tdap)
All adults; pregnant individuals 
should have an extra dose
Booster every 10 years
2
Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Children and 
Adolescents Aged 18 Years or 
Younger - United States, 2025, 
and Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Adults Aged  
19 Years or Older - United 
States, 2025 (6,7)
Zoster
≥50 years of age
Two-dose Shingrix, even if 
previously vaccinated
1
Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Children and 
Adolescents Aged 18 Years or 
Younger - United States, 2025, 
and Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization 
Schedule for Adults Aged  
19 Years or Older - United 
States, 2025 (6,7)
For a comprehensive list of vaccines, refer to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention web site at cdc.gov/vaccines/. Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices recommendations can be found at cdc.gov/acip/?CDC_AAref_Val=https://cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/recommendations. COVID-19, 
coronavirus disease 2019; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation; PCV13, 13-valent pneumococcal conju­
gate vaccine; PCV15, 15-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PCV 20, 20-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PPSV23, 23-valent pneumococ­
cal polysaccharide vaccine; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus. *Evidence type: 1, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or overwhelming evidence 
from observational studies; 2, RCTs with important limitations or exceptionally strong evidence from observational studies; 3, observational 
studies or RCTs with notable limitations; 4, clinical experience and observations, observational studies with important limitations, or RCTs 
with several major limitations.
A low-trauma fracture (defined as a 
fracture occurring from minimal trauma, 
such as falling from standing height or 
less) of the hip, pelvis, vertebra, or fore­
arm in adults aged ≥65 years is diagnos­
tic of osteoporosis, regardless of BMD. 
Such fractures are among the strongest 
predictors of future fracture risk, espe­
cially in the first 1–2 years after a 
fracture (22,23). Osteoporotic fractures, 
especially those of the hip, are associated 
with significant morbidity, mortality, and 
societal costs (24). It is estimated that 
20% of individuals do not survive to 
1 year after hip fracture, while 60% do 
S68 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
not regain their prior functionality, living 
with permanent disability (25).
Table 4.4—Diagnostic assessment
Individuals who should receive BMD testing
People aged ≥65 years
Postmenopausal women and men aged ≥50 years with history of adult-age fracture or with 
diabetes-specific risk factors: 
• Frequent hypoglycemic events 
• Diabetes duration >10 years 
• Diabetes medications: insulin, thiazolidinediones, sulfonylureas 
• A1C >8% 
• Peripheral or autonomic neuropathy, retinopathy, nephropathy 
• Frequent falls 
• Glucocorticoid use: prednisone at doses >2.5 mg per day for ≥3 months 
Hip fractures in people with diabetes 
are associated with higher risk of mortality 
(28% in women and 57% in men), longer 
recovery, and delayed healing (26) com­
pared with individuals without diabetes.
Epidemiology and Risk Factors
Age-specific fracture risk is significantly 
increased in people with type 1 or type 2 
diabetes in both sexes, with a 34% in­
crease in fracture risk compared with 
those without diabetes (27).
Type 1 Diabetes. Fracture risk in people 
with type 1 diabetes is increased by 4.35 
times for hip fractures, 1.83 times for up­
per-limb fractures, and 1.97 times for ankle 
fractures (28). Fractures occur at young 
ages, 10–15 years earlier than they do in 
people without diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is 
often associated with low bone mass, al­
though BMD underestimates the high risk 
of fracture observed in young individuals 
(28). Risk of fracture is increased in people 
with type 1 diabetes with microvascular 
complications or neuropathy compared 
with those without these complications. 
(26). Moreover, average A1C >7.9% (risk ra­
tio [RR] 3.57 [CI 1.08–11.78]), duration of di­
abetes >26 years (RR 7.6 [CI 1.67–34.6]), 
and family history of fractures (RR 2.64 [CI 
1.15–6.09]) have been independently asso­
ciated with high risk of nonvertebral frac­
tures (29).
Type 2 Diabetes. In people with type 2 
diabetes, even with normal or higher 
BMD, hip fracture risk is increased by 
1.79 times, and risk throughout life is 
40–70% higher than in it is in individuals 
without diabetes (27,30,31). According 
to a meta-analysis that included 15 stud­
ies, people with type 2 diabetes had a 
35% higher incidence of vertebral frac­
tures, causing increased risk of mortality 
(hazard ratio [HR] 2.11 [95% CI 1.72–2.59]) 
(32). Fracture risk is also increased in the 
upper limbs and ankle. Despite normal to 
high BMD compared with individuals with­
out type 2 diabetes, the velocity of bone 
loss with age is greater in individuals with 
type 2 diabetes, and low BMD remains a 
risk factor for fractures (33,34).
Glycemic management significantly 
impacts fracture risk in people with dia­
betes. A meta-analysis revealed an 8% in­
creased fracture risk per 1% rise in A1C 
level (RR 1.08 [95% CI 1.03–1.14]) (35). 
Poor glycemic management (A1C >9%) 
over 2 years in individuals with type 2 di­
abetes correlated with a 29% heightened 
fracture risk (36). Notably, this risk was 
higher among White individuals than in 
other racial groups. Hypoglycemia also 
escalates the risk of fractures at the hip 
and other skeletal sites (RR 1.52 [95% CI 
1.23–1.88]) (35). A Japanese study ech­
oed these findings, showing a fracture 
risk increase (HR 2.24 [95% CI 1.56–3.21]) 
with severe hypoglycemia episodes (37).
Longer diabetes duration further ele­
vates fracture risk (38,39). Data indicate 
individuals who have had type 2 diabetes 
for >10 years face significantly higher 
fracture risks. Longer duration of disease 
may be associated with deposition of ad­
vanced glycation end products into the 
bone matrix, microvascular damage, and 
a proinflammatory state, which all impair 
bone cell activity and bone microdamage 
repair (40) Additionally, high fracture risk 
is seen in people with CVD, nephropathy, 
retinopathy, neuropathy, poor physical 
function, and frequent falls (41–43).
Screening
Most evidence on screening in individu­
als at risk for fracture is available from 
people with type 2 diabetes; fracture 
risk prediction using BMD in type 1 dia­
betes has not been extensively studied. 
Health care professionals should assess 
fracture history and risk factors in people 
with diabetes and recommend measure­
ment of BMD if appropriate according to 
the individual’s age and sex.
Type 2 Diabetes. People with type 2 dia­
betes have 5–10% higher BMD than 
people without diabetes, although they 
present with lower bone strength, im­
paired bone microarchitecture, and ac­
celerated bone loss (33,44–46). Fracture 
risk was higher in large observational 
studies in participants with diabetes 
compared with those without diabetes 
for a given T-score and age (34). There­
fore, a T-score adjustment of −0.5 has 
been proposed to improve fracture pre­
diction by dual-energy X-ray absorpti­
ometry (DXA). For example, a T-score 
≤−2.0 should be interpreted as equiva­
lent to −2.5 in a person without diabetes. 
Notably, the Fracture Risk Assessment 
Tool (FRAX), a medical calculator that 
predicts 10-year risk of fractures, does 
not incorporate type 2 diabetes as a 
risk factor and thus has also been shown 
to underestimate fracture risk for this 
population (34). Building on the recog­
nized limitations of FRAX in type 2 diabe­
tes, multiple large cohort studies and 
meta-analyses consistently demonstrate 
that type 2 diabetes is an independent 
risk factor for fracture and that FRAX sys­
tematically underestimates fracture risk 
in this population. This underestimation 
is observed across diverse ethnic groups, 
increases with longer diabetes duration, 
and is particularly pronounced for hip 
fractures and in older adults with diabe­
tes. Several strategies have been pro­
posed to improve FRAX performance in 
type 2 diabetes, including 1) using the 
rheumatoid arthritis input as a surrogate 
for diabetes, 2) lowering the femoral 
neck T-score input by 0.5 SD, 3) increas­
ing the age by 10 years, or 4) incorporat­
ing trabecular bone score adjustments 
(47–49). However, recent findings indicate 
that fracture risk may be similar for a 
given femoral neck T-score in people with 
and without diabetes (39).
Fracture risk prediction may be en­
hanced by use of trabecular bone score 
(50,51), although such studies are not 
available for individuals with type 1 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S69 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetes and are based on data from 
the U.S. or Canada.
In people with type 2 diabetes, BMD 
should be monitored by DXA scan in 
older adults (aged ≥65 years) in the ab­
sence of other comorbidities and in 
younger individuals (≥50 years of age) 
with bone or diabetes-related risk fac­
tors, such as insulin use or diabetes du­
ration >10 years (Table 4.4). Reassessment 
is recommended every 2–3 years (48), 
depending on the screening evaluation, 
antiosteoporosis medication initiation/ 
monitoring, and the presence of additional 
risk factors, although the evidence on how 
frequently DXA should be repeated is less 
robust. According to the European Associa­
tion for the Study of Obesity (EASO), DXA 
should be performed every 2 years in indi­
viduals undergoing metabolic surgery.
DXA-assisted vertebral fracture assess­
ment is a convenient and low-cost method 
to assess vertebral fractures, although tra­
ditional lateral thoracic/lumbar spine X-ray 
is still considered the gold standard 
(52). MRI or computed tomography im­
aging studies performed for other pur­
poses should be analyzed for presence 
of vertebral fractures as well as chest 
X-rays in hospitalized individuals.
Type 1 Diabetes. Because hip fracture 
risk in type 1 diabetes starts to increase 
after the age of 50 years, clinicians may 
consider assessing BMD after the 5th 
decade of life or earlier in the presence 
of low-trauma fracture or additional risk 
factors for bone loss (28). In people 
with type 1 diabetes, BMD underesti­
mates fracture risk, but studies do not 
address the extent of underestimation 
of fracture risk.
According to the International Society for 
Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD), 
regular assessment of bone health using 
bone densitometry in children and ado­
lescents with type 1 diabetes is still con­
troversial and not recommended, but it 
may be considered in association with ce­
liac disease (51).
Management
Appropriate glycemic management and 
minimizing hypoglycemic episodes are 
crucial for bone health in people with 
diabetes. Individuals with prolonged 
disease, microvascular and macrovas­
cular complications, or frequent hypo­
glycemic episodes face higher fracture 
risks and fall risks due to factors like 
poor vision, neuropathy, sarcopenia, 
and impaired gait. Health care professio­
nals should advocate for moderate physi­
cal activity to enhance muscle health, 
gait coordination, and balance as part of 
fracture preventive strategies (42,43,53). 
For specific recommendations on physical 
activity for older adults, please refer to 
section 13, “Older Adults.”
Osteoporosis and fracture prevention 
are first based on measures applied to 
the general population. All people with 
diabetes should receive an adequate 
daily intake of protein, calcium, and vi­
tamin D and stop smoking (54–56). All 
individuals should engage in regular 
physical activity, including aerobic activ­
ities and weight-bearing, flexibility, and 
balance exercise.
Intake of calcium (1,000–1,200 mg) 
should reflect the age-specific recom­
mendations for the general population 
and should be obtained through nutri­
tion plan and/or oral supplements (57).
The optimal level of 25-hydroxyvitamin 
D is a matter of controversy (58), al­
though serum levels 20–30 ng/mL are 
generally thought to be sufficient (59). 
For individuals receiving antiresorptive 
therapy (including bisphosphonate ther­
apy), a 25-hydroxyvitamin D level of 
>30 ng/mL has been recommended 
(60,61).
The safe upper limit is also a matter of 
debate, and there is substantial disagree­
ment over whether to treat to a specified 
serum level. In the U.S., the recommended 
daily allowance of vitamin D is 600 IU for 
people aged 51–70 years and 800 IU for 
people aged >70 years (59). In clinical 
practice, this dose of supplement may not 
be sufficient to reach recommended serum 
levels of vitamin D, particularly in those at 
risk for vitamin D deficiency, and therefore 
supplementation should be individualized. 
Of note, recent draft recommendations 
made by the U.S. Preventive Services Task 
Force caution against supplementation 
with vitamin D (with or without calcium) for 
the primary prevention of fractures in com­
munity-dwelling postmenopausal women 
and men aged 60 years or older (62).
Fractures are important outcomes of 
frailty, a predisability condition that should 
be mitigated with individualized interven­
tions to prevent falls, maintain mobility, 
and delay disability (63). In many circum­
stances, conservative management (cal­
cium, vitamin D, and lifestyle measures) 
are not enough to reduce fracture risk. 
When pharmacological treatment is 
needed, treatment initiation strategies are 
the same as those used for the general 
population. Antiosteoporosis medications 
reduce bone resorption (bisphosphonates, 
selective estrogen receptor modulators, 
and denosumab), stimulate bone forma­
tion (teriparatide and abaloparatide), or 
have dual actions by stimulating bone for­
mation and reducing bone resorption (ro­
mosozumab). These agents improve bone 
density and reduce the risk of vertebral 
and nonvertebral fractures. Although 
there are no studies specifically designed 
for people with diabetes, data on antire­
sorptive and osteoanabolic agents sug­
gest efficacy in type 2 diabetes is similar 
to that for individuals without diabetes 
(64–66). Using individual participant data 
from randomized trials, antiresorptive 
therapies reduce fracture risk in people 
with and without type 2 diabetes for ver­
tebral, hip, and nonvertebral fractures 
(64). No similar studies of efficacy of anti­
osteoporosis treatment in people with 
type 1 diabetes have been published.
Primary Prevention of Fragility Fractures 
in People With Diabetes. In the general 
population, it is recommended that peo­
ple with diabetes with a T-score ≤−2.5 
or an elevated FRAX score (≥3% for hip 
fracture or ≥20% for major osteoporotic 
fracture) should be considered for 
pharmacological treatment with first-line 
drug therapy (alendronate, risedronate, 
ibandronate, and zoledronate or denosu­
mab). In type 2 diabetes, since T-score 
underestimates fracture risk (as discussed 
above), pharmacological treatment should 
be strongly considered for adults with dia­
betes with a T-score between −2.0 and 
−2.5 in the presence of additional risk fac­
tors for fracture such as falls and elevated 
FRAX score.
The risk of hypocalcemia associated 
with denosumab use in individuals with 
CKD is markedly increased in advanced 
CKD (estimated glomerular filtration rate 
<30 mL/min/1.73 m2) and is highest in 
dialysis-dependent individuals. This risk 
must be proactively managed with pre­
treatment assessment, supplementation, 
close monitoring, and specialist consulta­
tion. Data from a phase 3 trial, Future Re­
vascularization Evaluation in Patients With 
Diabetes Mellitus: Optimal Management of 
Multivessel Disease (FREEDOM), and its 10- 
year extension have shown that people 
with diabetes treated with denosumab 
S70 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
experienced positive effects on fasting glu­
cose (67) and significant improvements in 
BMD and lower vertebral fracture risk (49). 
However, according to a post hoc subgroup 
analysis, a higher risk of nonvertebral frac­
tures was observed in people with diabetes 
treated with denosumab (49). Self-manage­
ment abilities of the person with diabetes 
should be considered in medication selec­
tion because inability to maintain the 
every 6-month denosumab injection 
schedule can lead to rebound bone loss 
and spontaneous vertebral fractures, 
careful individual selection and counsel­
ing are important prior to drug initiation. Bi­
sphosphonate therapy (oral or intravenous) 
may be more appropriate in individuals 
with poor medication-taking behavior or 
gaps in access to medical care. As diabetes is 
a low-bone-turnover condition, very-high- 
risk individuals should be considered 
for osteoanabolic therapy (teriparatide, 
abaloparatide, romosozumab). Teriparatide 
showed positive effects on BMD and frac­
ture risk in people with diabetes (65,66).
Romosozumab received FDA approval 
only for postmenopausal women with a 
box warning because it may increase risk of 
myocardial infarction, stroke, or cardiovas­
cular death. Although real-world data sug­
gests that romosozumab may not lead to 
an increase in cardiac events (68), it should 
not be prescribed in individuals who experi­
enced a myocardial infarction or a stroke 
within the past year (69,70). Osteoanabolic 
treatments must be followed by antiresorp­
tives to preserve BMD gains. Without con­
solidation, BMD declines within a year as 
increased bone turnover leads to rapid loss 
of newly formed bone.
Secondary Prevention of Fragility Fractures.
The risk of subsequent low-trauma frac­
ture (hip, spine, nonvertebral site) is 
high, especially in the first 1–2 years after 
a fracture. Antiosteoporosis treatment re­
duces the risk of fracture in older individ­
uals with prior hip or vertebral fracture.
As in the general population, people 
with diabetes who experience fragility 
fracture should 1) be given the diagno­
sis of osteoporosis regardless of bone 
density data and 2) receive the appropriate 
work-up and therapy to prevent future frac­
tures (71). Individuals on long-term treat­
ment with antiosteoporosis medications, 
with multiple fragility fractures, or with mul­
tiple comorbidities should be referred to a 
bone metabolic specialist. In these more 
complicated cases, a bone specialist may 
choose to initiate an osteoanabolic agent to 
optimize bone formation and reduce im­
mediate fracture risk (72). It is strongly rec­
ommended that all individuals with a 
fragility fracture be started on antiosteo­
porosis therapy and adequate calcium and 
vitamin D supplementation (if required) as 
soon as possible. In the appropriate individ­
ual, therapy may even be initiated during an 
inpatient stay to reduce care delays (71).
Glucose-Lowering Medications and  
Bone Health
Care plans for type 2 diabetes treatment 
should consider individual fracture risk and 
the potential effect of medications on bone 
metabolism. Metformin has a safe bone 
health profile (73,74). Studies have re­
ported increased fracture incidences in 
women using thiazolidinediones (TZD), 
with the risk doubling with 1–2 years of 
TZD use compared with placebo or other 
glucose-lowering medications (HR 2.23 
[95% CI 1.65–3.01]) (75,76). According to 
the Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk 
in Diabetes (ACCORD) study, reduced risk 
is noted in women who had discontinued 
TZD use for 1–2 years (HR 0.57 [95% CI 
0.35–0.92]) or >2 years (HR 0.42 [95% CI 
0.24–0.74]) compared with current users 
(77). Furthermore, individuals with type 2 
diabetes on sulfonylureas exhibit a height­
ened fracture risk (RR 1.30 [95% CI 
1.18–1.43]) (78) because of accelerated 
bone loss (46) and a higher rate of hypo­
glycemic events, which can trigger falls 
and fractures (79). Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 
inhibitors have been used in clinical prac­
tice for more than 15 years, and both clini­
cal trials and postmarketing data suggest a 
neutral impact on bone health (80,81). 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists 
(GLP-1 RAs) at low doses are likely neutral 
to beneficial with respect to BMD and 
fracture risk (82), though data are lacking 
for higher doses in which weight loss may 
be higher and more rapid with potential 
counteractive skeletal risk. Use of sodium–
glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors 
has raised some concerns. The Canagli­
flozin Cardiovascular Assessment Study 
(CANVAS) showed that the proportion of 
subjects with fracture was higher in the 
canagliflozin groups than the non-canagli­
flozin groups (2.7% vs. 1.9%, respec­
tively). Further analyses from the same 
trial and from the Canagliflozin and Renal 
Events in Diabetes with Established Ne­
phropathy Clinical Evaluation (CREDENCE) 
study found a neutral effect on fracture risk 
(83–86). Although few data are available, 
use of empagliflozin, ertugliflozin, or dapagli­
flozin has not been associated with negative 
effects on bone health (85–87). Use of insu­
lin has been shown to be associated with a 
doubling of the risk of hip fractures (79), 
likely because of higher risk of hypoglycemia, 
longer duration of the disease, and comor­
bidities that may contribute to diminished 
bone strength.
In conclusion, glucose-lowering medica­
tions with a good bone safety profile are 
preferred. This is especially true in older 
adults, in people with longer duration of 
diabetes, or in people with complications. 
Aggressive therapeutic approaches should 
be avoided in those who are frail and in 
older adults to prevent hypoglycemic events 
and falls.
Cancer
Diabetes is associated with increased risk 
of cancers of the liver, pancreas, endo­
metrium, colon and rectum, breast, and 
bladder (88). The association may result 
from shared risk factors between type 2 
diabetes and cancer (older age, obesity, 
and physical inactivity) but may also be 
due to diabetes-related factors (89), such 
as underlying disease physiology or dia­
betes treatments, although evidence for 
these links is scarce. People with diabe­
tes should be encouraged to undergo 
recommended age-and sex-appropriate 
cancer screenings, coordinated with their 
primary health care professional, and to 
reduce their modifiable cancer risk fac­
tors (obesity, physical inactivity, alcohol 
use, and smoking). New onset of atypical 
diabetes (lean body habitus and negative 
family history) in a middle-aged or older 
person may precede the diagnosis of 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (90). Addi­
tionally, in a nationwide cancer registry in 
New Zealand, postpancreatitis diabetes 
mellitus was associated with significantly 
higher risk (2.4-fold) of pancreatic cancer 
compared with pancreatitis after type 2 di­
abetes (91). However, in the absence of 
other symptoms (e.g., weight loss and 
abdominal pain), routine screening for 
pancreatic cancer is not currently recom­
mended. Metformin and sulfonylureas 
may have anticancer properties. Data for 
pioglitazone are mixed, with a previous 
concern for bladder cancer association. 
Recommendations cannot be made at 
this time (92–94). Thus far, the use of 
GLP-1 RAs has not been shown to be 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S71 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
associated with the incidence of thy­
roid cancer, pancreatic cancer, or any 
other type of cancer in humans (95,96). For 
information on glycemic management in 
the context of cancer treatment, see section 
9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic 
Treatment.”
Cognitive Impairment/Dementia
Diabetes is associated with a signifi­
cantly increased risk and rate of cogni­
tive decline and an increased risk of 
dementia (97). A meta-analysis of 122 
prospective observational studies found 
that individuals with diabetes had a 
43% higher risk of all types of dementia, 
a 43% higher risk of Alzheimer demen­
tia, and a 91% higher risk of vascular de­
mentia compared with individuals without 
diabetes (97). In a 15-year prospective 
study of community-dwelling people 
>60 years of age, the presence of diabe­
tes at baseline significantly increased the 
age-and sex-adjusted incidence of all- 
cause dementia, Alzheimer dementia, and 
vascular dementia compared with rates in 
those with normal glucose tolerance (98). 
The reverse is also true: people with 
Alzheimer dementia are more likely to 
develop diabetes than people without 
Alzheimer dementia, possibly linking criti­
cal metabolic processes that contribute 
to neurodegeneration (99). A new clinical 
entity of diabetes-related dementia is be­
ing recognized as distinct from Alzheimer 
dementia or vascular dementia. It is char­
acterized by slow progression of dementia, 
absence of typical neuroimaging findings 
seen in Alzheimer or vascular dementia, 
old age, high A1C levels, long duration 
of diabetes, high frequency of insulin 
use, frailty, and sarcopenia or dynapenia 
(100). See section 13, “Older Adults,” for 
a more detailed discussion regarding as­
sessment of cognitive impairment.
Recommendation
4.14 In the presence of cognitive 
impairment, diabetes treatment plans 
should be simplified as much as pos­
sible and tailored to minimize the risk 
of hypoglycemia. B
Glycemic Status and Cognition
In individuals with diabetes, higher A1C 
level is associated with lower cogni­
tive function (101). A meta-analysis of 
randomized trials found that intensive 
glycemic management, compared with 
higher A1C goals, was associated with 
a slightly lower rate of cognitive de­
cline. However, these findings were 
driven by an older study with an A1C 
goal of <7.0% in the intensive treat­
ment arm. Analyses within the ACCORD, 
Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: 
Preterax and Diamicron MR Controlled 
Evaluation (ADVANCE), and Veterans Af­
fairs Diabetes Trial (VADT) studies found 
that intensive glycemic management (A1C 
goal of <6.0–6.5%) resulted in no dif­
ferences in cognitive outcomes com­
pared with standard control (102,103).
Results from the China Health and 
Retirement Study (CHARLS) report that 
in adults aged >45 years with type 2 di­
abetes, excessively low and high A1C 
levels (>9%) were associated with in­
creased risk of cognitive impairment (104). 
Therefore, intensive glycemic management 
should not be advised for the improve­
ment of cognitive function in individuals 
with type 2 diabetes. Additionally, people 
with type 2 diabetes and dementia are 
at heightened risk for experiencing hyper­
glycemic crises (diabetic ketoacidosis and 
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state) com­
pared with people without dementia 
(105), underscoring the importance of 
supporting and simplifying diabetes man­
agement for individuals experiencing cog­
nitive decline and diminished capacity for 
self-care. In addition, these individuals 
have increased difficulty with complex 
treatment and monitoring plans and are 
at risk for frailty, hypoglycemia, and dis­
ability (106).
In type 2 diabetes, severe hypoglyce­
mia is associated with reduced cognitive 
function, and those with poor cognitive 
function have more severe or repeated 
episodes of hypoglycemia. Multiple ob­
servational studies of adults with diabetes 
have found an association between severe 
hypoglycemic episodes and cognitive de­
cline or incident dementia (107–110). De­
creased cognitive function also increases 
the risk for severe hypoglycemia, likely 
through impaired ability to recognize 
and respond appropriately to hypoglycemic 
symptoms (107,111,112). Additionally, long- 
term follow up of Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Dia­
betes Interventions and Complications 
(DCCT/EDIC) showed recurrent severe 
hypoglycemia was associated with the 
highest risk of long-term psychomotor and 
mental function decline (113). Simplifying 
or deintensifying glycemic therapy 
and/or liberalizing A1C goals may pre­
vent hypoglycemia in individuals with 
cognitive dysfunction. See section 13, 
“Older Adults,” for more detailed discus­
sion of hypoglycemia in older people with 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
Dental Care
Recommendations
4.15 People with diabetes should 
be referred for a dental exam at least 
once per year. E
4.16 Coordinate efforts between the 
medical and dental teams to appro­
priately adjust glucose-lowering medi­
cation and treatment plans prior to 
and in the postdental procedure pe­
riod as needed. B
Periodontal disease is more severe, and 
may be more prevalent, in people with 
diabetes than in those without and has 
been associated with higher A1C levels 
(114,115). Longitudinal studies suggest 
that people with periodontal disease 
have higher rates of incident diabetes, 
suggesting a bidirectional relationship be­
tween diabetes and periodontal disease. 
Current evidence suggests that periodon­
tal disease adversely affects diabetes out­
comes, and periodontal treatment using 
subgingival instrumentation may improve 
glycemic outcomes (116,117).
The proportion of U.S. adults with di­
abetes seeing a dentist in the past year 
was significantly lower than that of individ­
uals without diabetes (56.7% vs. 65.4%). 
The majority of clinicians do not discuss 
oral health with individuals (118). In­
creased engagement in toothbrushing 
has been shown to be associated with 
improved oral health and better glycemic 
management in people with type 2 dia­
betes (119). Dental health professionals 
should be included in the diabetes care 
team when possible, using a collabora­
tive interprofessional care approach 
(120). Early detection of oral health prob­
lems by clinicians may be helpful to pro­
mote prompt referral to dental care and 
mitigate the expensive and extensive pro­
cedures needed to treat advanced oral 
disease (121,122). Clinical assessment of 
people with diabetes should include a 
dental history and an oral examination, 
and dental professionals should be in­
formed about key aspects of the person’s 
S72 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
health and diabetes treatment plan, in­
cluding glycemic goals, medications, and 
comorbid conditions (121,122). It is im­
portant for dental professionals to know 
when people with diabetes have high 
A1C levels, as this population may have 
lower oral healing capacity (123,124). He­
patic, cardiovascular, kidney, and pulmo­
nary conditions should also be known by 
dental professionals to assist in appro­
priate dosing of antibiotics and other 
medications. Coordination between den­
tal professionals and the diabetes care 
team will be especially important for 
people treated with insulin, sulfonylur­
eas, or meglitinides who are at risk for 
hypoglycemia during dental procedures, 
especially if fasting. Hypoglycemia can 
be mitigated by medication adjustment, 
blood glucose monitoring before and 
during the procedure, and treatment of 
hypoglycemia if appropriate. Therefore, 
dental professionals caring for people 
with diabetes should have access to 
blood glucose monitors during procedures 
as well as carbohydrates and glucagon to 
treat any hypoglycemia that occurs.
Disability
Recommendation
4.17 Assess for disability at the ini­
tial visit and for decline in function 
at each subsequent visit in people 
with diabetes. If a disability is im­
pacting functional ability or capacity 
to manage their diabetes, a referral 
should be made to an appropriate 
health care professional specializing 
in disability (e.g., physical medicine 
and rehabilitation specialist, physical 
therapist, occupational therapist, or 
speech-language pathologist). C
A disability is defined as a physical or 
mental impairment that substantially limits 
one or more major life activities of an indi­
vidual (125,126). Activities of daily living 
(ADLs) and instrumental activities of daily 
living (IADLs) comprise basic and complex 
life care tasks, respectively. The capacity to 
accomplish such tasks serves as an impor­
tant measure of function. Diabetes is asso­
ciated with an increase in the risk of work 
and physical disability, with estimates of 
50–80% increased risk of disability for 
people with diabetes compared with 
people without diabetes (127). Reviews 
have shown that lower-body functional 
limitation was the most prevalent dis­
ability (47–84%) among people with dia­
betes (128,129). In a systematic review 
and meta-analysis, the presence of diabe­
tes increased the risk of mobility disabil­
ity (15 studies; odds ratio [OR] 1.71 
[95% CI 1.53–1.91]; RR 1.51 [95% CI 
1.38–1.64]), of IADL disability (10 studies; 
OR 1.65 [95% CI 1.55–1.74]), and of ADL 
disability (16 studies; OR 1.82 [95% CI 
1.63–2.04]; RR 1.82 [95% CI 1.40–2.36]) 
(127). In a meta-analysis, diabetes was 
shown to be associated with an in­
creased risk of falls in older adults; 
falls occurred in 25% of individuals 
with diabetes compared with 18.2% 
of those without diabetes (130). The 
mechanisms underlying disability are 
multifactorial and include obesity, cor­
onary artery disease, stroke, lower ex­
tremity complications, and physiological 
factors such as hyperglycemia, sarcope­
nia, inflammation, and insulin resistance 
(131).
Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) 
is a common complication of both type 1 
and 2 diabetes and may cause impaired 
postural balance and gait kinematics 
(132), leading to functional disability. 
DPN can be found in up to half of people 
with type 1 or type 2 diabetes, resulting 
in physical disability, and neuropathic 
pain, resulting in a diminished quality of 
life (133). Glycemic management pre­
vents DPN development in type 1 diabe­
tes; in contrast, glycemic management 
has modest or no benefit in individuals 
with type 2 diabetes, possibly due to the 
combined effect of coexisting comorbid­
ities (133). People with lower-extremity 
involvement due to DPN have 3 times 
more risk of restricted mobility, resulting 
in them experiencing more physical dys­
functions and impairments than people 
who have diabetes but not neuropathy 
(134). Furthermore, DPN may progress 
to nontraumatic lower-limb amputation, 
which significantly impacts quality of life 
(135).
In addition to complications of diabe­
tes from microvascular conditions such 
as CKD, retinopathy, autonomic neurop­
athy, and peripheral neuropathy, it is 
important to recognize the disabilities 
caused by macrovascular complications 
of diabetes. These macrovascular com­
plications, which include coronary heart 
disease, stroke, and peripheral arterial 
disease, can lead to further impairments 
(128).
An assessment of disability should be 
performed to evaluate individuals’ abil­
ity to perform ADLs and IADLs, ensuring 
they can manage basic self-care and 
more complex tasks necessary for spe­
cific living situations. Referrals may be 
made as necessary to appropriate health 
care professionals specializing in disability 
(e.g., physical medicine and rehabilita­
tion physician, physical therapist, occu­
pational therapist, or speech-language 
pathologist) (127,136,137). Customized 
rehabilitation interventions for individ­
uals with a disability from diabetes can 
recover function, allowing for safe phys­
ical activity (138), and improve quality 
of life (139). Additionally, frailty is com­
monly associated with diabetes, with 
progression to disability, morbidity, and 
mortality in older adults. People with di­
abetes as well as frailty or disability may 
be sedentary and contend with comorbid 
conditions such as hypoglycemia, sarcope­
nia, falls, nutritional deficiencies, obesity, 
polypharmacy, and cognitive dysfunction. 
A thorough medical evaluation is impera­
tive to identify the best approaches to pre­
ventative and therapeutic interventions for 
frailty and diabetes management (140).
A psychosocial assessment should be 
conducted to screen for behavioral health 
conditions like depression and anxiety 
and to understand the individual’s social 
support and coping mechanisms. Func­
tional capacity evaluations, involving tests 
for physical endurance and strength, are 
used to gauge the ability of the person 
with diabetes to work and carry out daily 
activities. Additionally, standardized dis­
ability questionnaires and scales, such as 
the Diabetes Distress Scale (DDS) and the 
World Health Organization Disability As­
sessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0), are 
employed to measure the emotional bur­
den of diabetes and overall disability 
(141,142). These suggested structured 
assessments are particularly relevant if indi­
viduals have fallen, had emergency depart­
ment visits, missed appointments, made 
significant errors in the treatment plan, 
or exhibit apathy and depressed mood.
Moreover, when treating people with 
an acquired disability from diabetes, it 
is vital to consider social determinants 
of health, race and ethnicity, and socio­
economic status (143). Rates of diabetes- 
related major amputations are higher in 
individuals who are from racial and ethnic 
minoritized groups (144), live in rural 
areas, and are from regions with the 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S73 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
lowest socioeconomic levels (145). Ad­
dressing the complex challenges faced 
by individuals with acquired disabilities 
from diabetes requires a multifaceted ap­
proach involving solutions from both within 
and outside the health care system. By fo­
cusing on social determinants of health, 
health care professionals can develop ap­
propriate interventions, provide advocacy, 
and establish support systems that cater to 
the specific needs of this population. See 
section 1, “Improving Care and Promoting 
Health in Populations.”
Hepatitis C
Infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV) is 
associated with a higher prevalence of 
type 2 diabetes, which is present in up 
to one-third of individuals with chronic 
HCV infection. HCV may impair glucose 
metabolism by several mechanisms, in­
cluding directly via viral proteins and 
indirectly by altering proinflammatory 
cytokine levels (146). The use of newer 
direct-acting antiviral drugs produces a 
sustained virological response (cure) in 
nearly all cases and has been reported 
to improve glucose metabolism in indi­
viduals with diabetes (147). A meta- 
analysis of mostly observational studies 
found a mean reduction in A1C levels of 
0.45% (95% CI −0.60 to −0.30) and re­
duced requirement for glucose-lowering 
medication use following successful erad­
ication of HCV infection (148).
Sexual Health in Men
The most common sexual dysfunction in 
men is erectile dysfunction (ED), with an 
estimated prevalence of 52.5% in men 
with diabetes (149). The best predictors of 
ED are age (>40 years), CVD, diabetes, hy­
pertension, obesity, dyslipidemia, meta­
bolic syndrome, hypogonadism, smoking, 
depression, and use of medications such 
as antidepressants and opioids (150). Be­
cause diabetes, poor nutrition, obesity, 
lack of exercise, and CVD are often inter­
related, it may be challenging to identify 
the primary risk factor (151), although 
the most likely primary underlying risk 
factor is vascular disease (151).
Men with diabetes are at increased 
risk for both CVD and ED, and ED is a 
predictor of cardiovascular events in 
men with diabetes (152,153) as well as 
in men without diabetes. The significant 
factors associated with ED in men with 
diabetes are age, peripheral or auto­
nomic neuropathy, presence of micro­
vascular disease including retinopathy, 
CVD, duration of diabetes, poor glyce­
mic management, hypogonadism, and 
diuretic therapy (154). Physical activity 
may be protective. Men with diabetes 
and ED report a significant decline in 
quality-of-life measures and an increase 
in depressive symptoms (155), and de­
pression is a well-recognized risk factor 
for ED. Given the bidirectional relationship 
between ED and depression, treatment of 
either one can result in improvement in 
the other condition. CKD is also a risk factor 
for CVD and ED, with prevalence rates of 
ED >75% in men on hemodialysis (156).
Awareness and identification of these 
characteristics, factors, and behaviors 
can guide clinicians in early screening, 
treatment, prevention, and counseling 
in all men with diabetes and particularly 
those at higher risk for ED (154). Given 
the evidence that ED is strongly associ­
ated with diabetes and CVD, men with 
ED should be evaluated and managed for 
cardiovascular and endocrine risk factors. 
Glycemic assessment in men not previ­
ously diagnosed with diabetes, lipid profile, 
and morning total and free testosterone 
should be considered mandatory in all 
men newly presenting with ED (157).
In a recent meta-analysis, testosterone 
was superior to placebo in improving 
erectile function in men with testosterone 
deficiency; however, the magnitude of the 
effect was lower in the presence of diabe­
tes and obesity (158).
Meta-analyses show that all phospho­
diesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5Is) are 
superior to placebo in treating ED, lower 
dosages had effects comparable with 
those of higher dosages, and various 
PDE5Is show comparable efficacy (151). 
PDE5Is are associated with an increased 
risk of headaches, flushing, and dyspep­
sia (151). First-line therapy for ED in 
men with diabetes is PDE5Is, but men 
with diabetes may be less responsive 
than men without diabetes (149). Strat­
egies to improve response to PDE5Is in­
clude daily therapy and optimization of 
comorbidities. In men with diabetes not 
responding to PDEIs, other potentially 
effective treatments may include intra­
cavernosal injections, intraurethral pros­
taglandin, vacuum erection devices, and 
penile prosthetic surgery (149).
Mean levels of testosterone are lower 
in men with diabetes than in age-matched 
men without diabetes, but obesity is a 
major confounder (159,160). Testoster­
one replacement in men with symptom­
atic hypogonadism may have benefits, 
including improved sexual function, well- 
being, muscle mass and strength, and 
bone density (161). In men with diabetes 
who have symptoms or signs of low tes­
tosterone (hypogonadism), a morning 
total testosterone level should be mea­
sured using an accurate and reliable 
assay (162). In men who have total 
testosterone levels close to the lower 
limit, it is reasonable to determine 
free testosterone concentrations either di­
rectly from equilibrium dialysis assays or 
by calculations that use total testoster­
one, sex hormone binding globulin, and 
albumin concentrations (162). Further 
tests (such as prolactin, luteinizing hor­
mone and follicle-stimulating hormone 
levels) may be needed to further evalu­
ate the individual. Testosterone replace­
ment in older men with hypogonadism 
has been associated with increased cor­
onary artery plaque volume, with no 
conclusive evidence that testosterone 
supplementation is associated with in­
creased cardiovascular risk in all men 
with hypogonadism (162,163). Further­
more, ED is also common in people with 
diabetes (164), and it is reasonable to 
measure and correct testosterone levels 
close to the lower limit to address the li­
bido component that contributes to erec­
tile difficulties (151).
Recommendations
4.18 In men with diabetes or predi­
abetes, screen for erectile dysfunc­
tion (ED), particularly in those with 
high cardiovascular risk, retinopathy, 
cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney 
disease, peripheral or autonomic neu­
ropathy, longer duration of diabetes, 
depression, and hypogonadism and in 
those who are not meeting glycemic 
goals. B
4.19 In men with diabetes or predi­
abetes, inquire about sexual health 
(e.g., low libido and ED). If symp­
toms and/or signs of hypogonadism 
are detected, screen with a morning 
serum total testosterone level. B
Sexual Health in Women
Recommendations
4.20 In women with diabetes or predi­
abetes, inquire about sexual health by 
S74 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Female sexual dysfunction (FSD) is com­
mon in women with diabetes. In an epi­
demiologic 
cross-sectional study of 
community-residing middle-aged and 
older adults (57–85 years), women with 
diagnosed diabetes were less likely than 
men with diagnosed diabetes (adjusted 
OR 0.28 [95% CI 0.16–0.49]) and women 
without diabetes (0.63 [0.45–0.87]) to 
be sexually active (165). Older women 
with diabetes are as likely as men to 
have sexual problems but are signifi­
cantly less likely to have discussed sex 
with a physician (165).
While studies showing the association 
between diabetes and FSD are less con­
clusive than those in men, most have 
reported a higher prevalence of FSD in 
women with diabetes compared with 
women without diabetes (166), and a 
meta-analysis found that FSD is more 
common in women with type 1 and 
type 2 diabetes (OR 2.27 and 2.49, re­
spectively) than in women without di­
abetes (167).
A wide range of prevalence rates of 
sexual dysfunctions has been reported 
in women with diabetes. In women 
with type 1 diabetes, 16–85% (vs. 0–66% 
in women without diabetes) report prob­
lems with desire, 11–76% (vs. 0–41%) re­
port problems with arousal, and 9–66% 
(vs. 0–39%) report problems with or­
gasm; 9–57% (vs. 0–28%) report prob­
lems with lubrication, and 7–61% (vs. 
5–39%) report problems with pain. In 
women with type 2 diabetes, 70–82% 
(vs. 10–66% in women without diabetes) 
report problems with desire, 54–68% 
(vs. 3–41%) report problems with arousal, 
and 33–84% (vs. 2–39%) report problems 
with orgasm; 33–66% (vs. 4–28%) report 
problems with lubrication, and 33–46% 
(vs. 8–39%) report problems with pain 
(168).
Medical comorbidities that are risk fac­
tors for FSD include hypertension, obesity, 
metabolic syndrome, smoking, and hyper­
lipidemia. Clinical factors for consideration 
include longer duration of diabetic reti­
nopathy and neuropathy and individuals 
not meeting glycemic goals. The preva­
lence of FSD in women with kidney dis­
ease is 74% (169).
In women with diabetes, social and 
psychological components play a major 
role in FSD. Depression, anxiety, and 
emotional adjustments to diabetes have 
been found to be associated with sexual 
dysfunction in women with diabetes. A 
study from Norway reported that women 
with type 1 diabetes with scores on the 
Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) (a 
validated instrument) indicating sexual 
dysfunction were more likely than women 
without sexual dysfunction to have dia­
betes distress, depression, and meno­
pausal symptoms. They were also older 
and more likely to be single and post­
menopausal (170). Another study also 
showed that women with sexual dys­
function were significantly more likely 
to report impaired well-being, elevated 
diabetes distress, poor adjustment to 
diabetes, and moderate to severe anxi­
ety than women without sexual dys­
function (168).
In a qualitative study exploring the 
experiences of sexual health and sexual 
challenges, women with type 1 diabetes 
reported that diabetes affected their re­
lationship, including sex life, and had an 
impact on their partner. Challenges in­
cluded reduced sexual desire, decline in 
frequency, less spontaneous desire re­
sulting in lack of initiation, and physical 
challenges such as pain, vaginal dryness, 
and impaired sensitivity. Several women 
explained that vaginal dryness was an 
obstacle during sexual intercourse, lead­
ing to pain or even refraining from sexual 
activity. Sexual challenges were perceived 
to become a source of disappointment 
to the partners and consequential guilt 
for the women. Women also reported 
fear of hypoglycemia during sex, and 
some reported trying to maintain mild 
hyperglycemia. Technology devices, such 
as glucose monitors and insulin pumps, 
could be perceived as both a physical 
and mental obstacle during sexual activ­
ity (171).
Many women with diabetes would 
like their health care professional to ini­
tiate a discussion on how diabetes is af­
fecting their sex life (172). Women with 
type 1 diabetes almost unanimously 
endorsed that sexual health should be 
addressed, that they would find it a re­
lief that they were not alone, that they 
should be provided with information 
when they are young, and that it would 
be difficult to address the topic them­
selves (171). Unfortunately, many health 
care professionals do not actively dis­
cuss sexual functioning in consultations, 
meaning that when the topic is dis­
cussed it is mostly the person with dia­
betes who initiates the conversation 
(165). This leads to a marked underdiag­
nosis and undertreatment of sexual dys­
functions in people with diabetes.
While no specific guidelines are avail­
able for the treatment of FSD in this 
population, women with type 1 or type 2 
diabetes should be encouraged to engage 
in lifestyle interventions and, in the ab­
sence of contraindications, may benefit 
from already-approved treatments for 
FSD (173). The Look AHEAD (Action for 
Health in Diabetes) study on interven­
tion demonstrated statistical improve­
ments in the FSFI total score and all 
domains of sexual dysfunction (174). 
Lifestyle factors that enhance desire and 
sexual function include nutrition (such 
as the Mediterranean eating pattern), 
exercise (such as walking), and smoking 
cessation. Other interventions include 
improving glycemic management and 
prevention of diabetes complications; 
diagnosis and treatment of menopausal 
symptoms with hormonal therapies; ad­
dressing vaginal dryness and dyspareunia 
as well as urinary tract and mycotic gen­
ital infections; screening and addressing 
depression, anxiety, diabetes distress, 
and related psychosocial issues; and 
considering FDA-approved centrally act­
ing medications for hypoactive sexual 
desire disorder, including flibanserin and 
bremelanotide.
screening for desire (libido), arousal, 
and orgasm difficulties, particularly 
in those who experience depression 
and/or anxiety and those with recur-
rent urinary tract infections. B
4.21 In postmenopausal women with 
diabetes or prediabetes, screen for 
symptoms and/or signs of genitouri­
nary syndrome of menopause, includ­
ing vaginal dryness and dyspareunia. B
Metabolic Dysfunction–Associated 
Steatotic Liver Disease and Metabolic 
Dysfunction–Associated 
Steatohepatitis
Screening
Recommendations
4.22a Screen adults with type 2 dia­
betes or with prediabetes, particu­
larly those with obesity or other 
cardiometabolic risk factors or estab­
lished cardiovascular disease, for their 
risk of having or developing cirrhosis 
related to metabolic dysfunction–
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S75 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
associated steatohepatitis (MASH) 
using a calculated fibrosis-4 index 
(FIB-4) (derived from age, ALT, AST, 
and platelets [mdcalc.com/calc/2200/ 
fibrosis4-fib-4-index-liver-fibrosis]), even 
if they have normal liver enzymes. B
4.22b Adults with diabetes or predi­
abetes with persistently elevated 
plasma aminotransferase levels for 
>6 months and low FIB-4 should be 
evaluated for other causes of liver 
disease. B
4.23 Adults with type 2 diabetes or 
prediabetes with a FIB-4 ≥ 1.3 should 
have additional risk stratification by 
liver stiffness measurement with tran­
sient elastography, or, if unavailable, 
the enhanced liver fibrosis (ELF) test. B
4.24 Refer adults with type 2 diabetes 
or prediabetes at higher risk for signif­
icant liver fibrosis (i.e., as indicated by 
FIB-4, liver stiffness measurement, or 
ELF) to a gastroenterologist or hepa­
tologist for further evaluation and 
management. B
Metabolic dysfunction–associated stea- 
totic liver disease (MASLD) has replaced 
the term nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD) to identify steatotic liver disease. 
The definition includes the presence of 
steatotic liver disease and at least one 
cardiometabolic risk factor associated 
with insulin resistance (e.g., prediabetes, 
diabetes, atherogenic dyslipidemia, or 
hypertension) without other identifiable 
causes of steatosis (175). This is in the 
absence of ongoing or recent consump­
tion of significant amounts of alcohol 
(defined as ingestion of >21 standard 
drinks per week in men and >14 stan­
dard drinks per week in women over a 
2-year period preceding evaluation) or 
other secondary causes of hepatic stea­
tosis (176). It is estimated that in adults 
in the U.S., the prevalence of MASLD is 
>70% of people with type 2 diabetes 
(177–179) This is consistent with studies 
from other countries (180,181). The new 
definition of MASLD aims to remove 
potential stigma from the term “fatty” 
when referring to steatosis, highlights 
the role of prediabetes and type 2 dia­
betes in MASLD, and provides a posi­
tive diagnosis by using cardiometabolic 
risk factors as surrogates for insulin re­
sistance, the main driver for the devel­
opment of steatosis. The new definition 
correlates well with the past definition 
of MASLD for people with prediabetes 
or type 2 diabetes (who already have, 
by definition, one cardiometabolic risk 
factor). A separate category outside of 
MASLD, named metabolic dysfunction 
and alcoholic liver disease, was created 
for circumstances in which alcohol in­
take is greater than that allowed for 
MASLD but less than that attributed to 
alcoholic liver disease. More research is 
needed to better characterize the pre­
dictive value for metabolic dysfunction–
associated steatohepatitis (MASH) of 
different cardiometabolic risk factors 
and the natural history of metabolic 
dysfunction and alcoholic liver disease 
or steatosis in young adults without 
cardiometabolic risk factors.
Diabetes is a major risk factor for de­
veloping MASH (formerly nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis, or NASH) and worse 
liver outcomes (180,181). MASH is de­
fined histologically as having ≥5% he­
patic steatosis with inflammation and 
hepatocyte injury (hepatocyte balloon­
ing), with or without evidence of liver fi­
brosis (176). Steatohepatitis is estimated 
to affect more than half of people with 
type 2 diabetes with MASLD (182,183). Fi­
brosis stages are classified histologically 
as the following: F0, no fibrosis; F1, mild; 
F2, moderate (significant); F3, severe (ad­
vanced); and F4, cirrhosis. In the U.S., be­
tween 12 and 20% of people with type 2 
diabetes have “at-risk” MASH (i.e., 
steatohepatitis with clinically significant 
fibrosis [≥F2] and at risk for cirrhosis) 
(177,178,182). A similar or higher preva­
lence has been observed worldwide 
(180,181,183). People with type 2 diabe­
tes and at-risk MASH are at an increased 
risk of future cirrhosis, hepatocellular car­
cinoma (HCC) (184,185), and liver trans­
plantation (186). The prevalence of MASLD 
in people with type 1 diabetes is ∼20% 
and is driven by obesity, which is becoming 
more common in this population (187), 
with a large variability across studies using 
different steatosis measurement methods 
(188). The prevalence of liver steatosis in a 
population with type 1 diabetes by MRI 
(i.e., the gold standard) with low preva­
lence of obesity was only 8.8% compared 
with 68% in people with type 2 diabetes 
(189). The prevalence of clinically significant 
fibrosis (≥F2) is estimated to be ∼5% 
(190), which is much lower than the preva­
lence in type 2 diabetes (177,178,182). 
Therefore, screening for fibrosis in people 
with type 1 diabetes should only be consid­
ered in the presence of additional risk fac­
tors for MASLD, such as obesity, incidental 
hepatic steatosis on imaging, or elevated 
plasma aminotransferases.
Clinicians underestimate the preva­
lence of at-risk MASH and do not con­
sistently implement appropriate screening 
strategies in people with prediabetes or 
type 2 diabetes, thus missing a chance to 
establish an early diagnosis. This pattern of 
underdiagnosis is compounded by sparse 
referral to specialists and inadequate pre­
scription of medications with potential 
efficacy in MASH (191,192). The goal 
of screening for MASLD is to identify peo­
ple with at-risk MASH to prevent future 
cirrhosis, HCC, liver transplantation, and 
all-cause mortality (193–196). This risk is 
higher in people who have central obesity 
and cardiometabolic risk factors or insulin 
resistance, are >50 years of age, and/or 
have persistently elevated plasma amino­
transferases (AST and/or ALT >30 units/L 
for >6 months) (178,197). Some genetic 
variants that alter hepatocyte triglyceride 
metabolism may also increase the risk of 
MASH progression and cirrhosis (198,199), 
amplifying the impact of obesity, but the 
role of genetic testing in clinical practice 
remains to be established. Individuals with 
MASLD also are at a greater risk of devel­
oping extrahepatic cancer (185), type 2 dia­
betes (194), and CVD (200,201). Emerging 
evidence suggests that MASLD increases 
the risk of CKD in people with type 2 
diabetes, particularly when liver fibrosis 
is present (202,203), although the associ­
ation of MASLD with diabetic retinopathy 
is less clear (204).
The fibrosis-4 index (FIB-4) is the 
most cost-effective strategy for the ini­
tial screening of people with prediabe­
tes and cardiometabolic risk factors or 
with type 2 diabetes for at-risk MASH in 
primary care and diabetes clinical set­
tings (181,192,197,205–208). The diag­
nostic algorithm for the screening and 
liver fibrosis risk stratification of people 
with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes is 
shown in Fig. 4.2. A screening strategy 
relying on elevated plasma aminotrans­
ferases >40 units/L would miss most in­
dividuals with MASH in these settings, 
as at-risk MASH with clinically significant 
fibrosis (≥F2) is frequently observed with 
plasma aminotransferases below the 
commonly used cutoff of 40 units/L 
(177–179,182,209,210). The American 
College of Gastroenterology considers 
S76 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
the upper limit of normal ALT levels to 
be 29–33 units/L for male individuals 
and 19–25 units/L for female individu­
als (211), as higher levels are associ­
ated with increased liver-related mortality. 
The FIB-4 estimates the risk of hepatic 
cirrhosis and is calculated from the com­
putation of age, plasma aminotransfer­
ases (AST and ALT), and platelet count 
(mdcalc.com/calc/2200/fibrosis-4-fib-4 
-index-liver-fibrosis). A value of <1.3 is
considered low risk of having advanced
fibrosis (F3–F4) and for developing ad­
verse liver outcomes, while ≥1.3 is
considered as having a higher probabil­
ity of at-risk MASH clinically significant
fibrosis (≥F2) and increased risk of ad­
verse liver outcomes. A value of >2.67
confers a high risk of having advanced
fibrosis (F3–F4), and referral to the
liver specialist is warranted without ad­
ditional testing. FIB-4 predicts changes 
over time in hepatic fibrosis (212,213) and 
allows risk stratification of individuals in 
terms of future liver-related morbidity and 
mortality (214). FIB-4 has reasonable 
sensitivity but low specificity; hence, a 
negative result may rule out fibrosis while 
a positive result requires confirmatory 
testing (213,215,216). Therefore, a FIB-4 
score <1.3 should be taken as a general 
guidance of having a lower risk of MASH 
with advanced fibrosis but does not re­
place clinical judgement. Its low cost, sim­
plicity, and good specificity make it the 
initial test of choice (Fig. 4.2). FIB-4 has 
not been validated in pediatric populations 
or in adults aged <35 years. In individuals 
with diabetes ≥65 years of age, higher 
cutoffs for FIB-4 have been recommended 
(1.9–2.0 rather than ≥1.3) (217). In some 
individuals with at-risk MASH, FIB-4 score 
may be <1.3, especially in those with obe­
sity and type 2 diabetes. Additional testing 
may be required if the FIB-4 score is 
between 1.0 and 1.3 in individuals with 
type 2 diabetes with multiple cardiome­
tabolic risk factors.
Lower risk 
of cirrhosis
Managed by primary care 
(and interprofessional team)
• 
• Optimize lifestyle and 
treatment of comorbidities
Managed by liver specialist 
(and interprofessional team)
•
Additional imaging and
biomarker risk stratification
•
Treatment + long-term
follow-up
Higher risk 
of  cirrhosis
Groups with the highest 
risk of cirrhosis
?
Type 2 diabetes
Prediabetes
Rule out 
secondary 
causes of 
steatosis 
or ↑ ALT
No
No
Yes
Yes
Diagnostic algorithm for the prevention of cirrhosis in people with
metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD)
Repeat FIB-4 every 1–2
years
Is LSM
≥8.0 kPa* ?
Obesity
with ≥1 CV factors
specialist if ELF ≥9.8
*Consider ELF if LSM not
available. Refer to liver
If FIB-4
>2.67
Figure 4.2—Diagnostic algorithm for risk stratification and the prevention of cirrhosis in individuals with metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic 
liver disease (MASLD). CV, cardiovascular; ELF, enhanced liver fibrosis test; FIB-4, fibrosis-4 index; LSM, liver stiffness measurement, as measured 
by vibration-controlled transient elastography. *In the absence of LSM, consider ELF a diagnostic alternative. If ELF ≥9.8, an individual is at high 
risk of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis with advanced liver fibrosis (≥F3–F4) and should be referred to a liver specialist. 
In individuals with a FIB-4 ≥1.3, there 
is need for additional risk stratification 
with a liver stiffness measurement (LSM) 
by transient elastography (Fig. 4.2). Use 
of a second nonproprietary diagnostic 
panel is not recommended (e.g., MASLD 
fibrosis score and others), as they gener­
ally do not perform better than FIB-4 
(176,179,215). Transient elastography (LSM) 
is the best-validated imaging technique for 
fibrosis risk stratification, and it predicts 
future cirrhosis and all-cause mortality in 
MASLD (176,197,205,206,218). An LSM 
value of <8.0 kPa has a good negative 
predictive value to exclude advanced fi­
brosis (≥F3–F4) (219–221) and indicates 
lower risk for clinically significant fibrosis. 
Such individuals with prediabetes or type 2 
diabetes can be followed in nonspecialty 
clinics with repeat surveillance testing ev­
ery ≥2 years, although the precise time 
interval remains to be established. If 
the LSM is ≥8.0 kPa, the risk for ad­
vanced fibrosis (≥F3-F4) is higher and 
such individuals should be referred to 
the hepatologist (176,182,197,205) within 
the framework of an interprofessional 
team (222–224). FIB-4 followed by LSM 
helps stratify individuals with diabetes by 
risk level and minimize specialty referrals 
(218,225–228) (Fig. 4.2). Given the lack 
of widespread availability of LSM, the ELF 
test is a good alternative (229). Individuals 
with ELF <9.8 are considered at low risk 
for adverse liver outcomes. Individuals 
with ELF ≥9.8 are considered at high risk 
of having MASH with advanced liver fibro­
sis (≥F3–F4) and therefore are at risk for 
adverse liver outcomes (176,206,208). 
diabetesjournals.org/care
   Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S77 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
They should be referred to a gastroenterol­
ogist or hepatologist. The optimal cutoff for 
clinical use of ELF in primary care and en­
docrinology settings is evolving (230–233). 
An ELF <9.8 suggests an individual is at 
low risk of advanced liver fibrosis and may 
be followed in the nonspecialty clinic with 
repeat testing in ≥2 years but may need 
repeat testing more often if ELF is between 
9.2 and 9.7.
Specialists may order additional tests 
for fibrosis risk stratification in MASH 
(175,197,205,208), including magnetic 
resonance elastography (MRE) (best over­
all performance, particularly for early 
fibrosis stages) or multiparametric iron- 
corrected T1 MRI (cT1) (234) and pat­
ented blood-based fibrosis biomarkers. 
While liver biopsy remains the gold stan­
dard for the diagnosis of MASH, its indi­
cation is reserved to the discretion of 
the specialist within an interprofessional 
team approach due to high costs and 
potential for morbidity associated with 
this procedure.
Management
Recommendations
4.25 Adults with type 2 diabetes or 
prediabetes, particularly with over­
weight or obesity, who have meta­
bolic dysfunction–associated steatotic 
liver disease (MASLD) should be rec­
ommended lifestyle changes using an 
interprofessional approach that pro­
motes weight loss, ideally within a 
structured nutrition plan and physical 
activity program for cardiometabolic 
benefits B and histological improve­
ment. C
4.26 In adults with type 2 diabetes, 
MASLD, and overweight or obesity, 
consider using a glucagon-like pep­
tide 1 receptor agonist (GLP-1 RA) 
with demonstrated benefits in MASH 
A or a dual glucose-dependent insuli­
notropic polypeptide (GIP) and GLP-1 
RA with potential benefits in MASH B 
for the treatment of obesity as an ad­
junctive therapy to lifestyle interven­
tions for weight loss.
4.27a In adults with type 2 diabetes 
and biopsy-proven MASH or those 
at high risk for liver fibrosis (based 
on noninvasive tests), a GLP-1 RA is 
preferred for glycemic management 
due to beneficial effects on MASH. 
A Pioglitazone B or a dual GIP and 
GLP-1 RA B can be considered for 
glycemic management due to po­
tential beneficial effects on MASH.
4.27b Combination therapy with 
pioglitazone plus GLP-1 RA can be 
considered for the treatment of hy­
perglycemia in adults with type 2 di­
abetes with biopsy-proven MASH or 
those at high risk of liver fibrosis 
(identified with noninvasive tests) 
because of potential beneficial ef­
fects on MASH. B
4.28 For consideration of treatment 
with a thyroid hormone receptor-β 
agonist in adults with type 2 diabe­
tes or prediabetes with MASLD with 
moderate (F2) or advanced (F3) liver 
fibrosis on liver histology, or by a vali­
dated imaging-based or blood-based 
test, refer to a gastroenterologist or 
hepatologist with expertise in MASLD 
management. A
4.29 Treatment initiation and moni­
toring should be individualized and 
within the context of an interprofes­
sional team that includes a gastroenter­
ologist or hepatologist, consideration of 
individual preferences, and a careful 
shared-decision cost-benefit discus­
sion. B
4.30a In adults with type 2 diabetes 
and MASLD, use of glucose-lowering 
therapies other than pioglitazone or 
GLP-1 RAs may be continued as clini­
cally indicated, but these therapies 
lack evidence of benefit in MASH. B
4.30b Insulin therapy is the pre­
ferred agent for the treatment of 
hyperglycemia in adults with type 2 
diabetes with decompensated cir­
rhosis. C
4.31a Adults with type 2 diabetes 
and MASLD are at increased cardio­
vascular risk; therefore, comprehen­
sive management of cardiovascular 
risk factors is recommended. B
4.31b Statin therapy is safe in adults 
with type 2 diabetes and compensated 
cirrhosis from MASLD and should be 
initiated or continued for cardiovascu­
lar risk reduction as clinically indicated. 
B In people with decompensated cir­
rhosis, statin therapy should be used 
with caution, and close monitoring is 
needed, given limited safety and effi­
cacy data. B
4.32a Consider metabolic surgery in 
appropriate candidates as an option 
to treat MASH in adults with type 2 
diabetes and obesity B and to im­
prove cardiovascular outcomes. B
4.32b Metabolic surgery should be 
used with caution in adults with 
type 2 diabetes with compensated 
cirrhosis from MASLD B and is not 
recommended in decompensated 
cirrhosis. B
While steatohepatitis and cirrhosis oc­
cur in lean people with diabetes and 
are believed to be linked to genetic pre­
disposition, insulin resistance, and envi­
ronmental factors (235,236), ample 
evidence implicates excess visceral fat 
and overall adiposity in individuals with 
overweight and obesity in the patho­
genesis of the disease (236,237). Obe­
sity in the setting of type 2 diabetes 
worsens insulin resistance and steato­
hepatitis, promoting the development 
of cirrhosis (238). Therefore, clinicians 
should enact evidence-based interventions 
(as discussed in section 5, “Facilitating 
Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
to Improve Health Outcomes”) to pro­
mote healthy lifestyle change and weight 
loss for individuals with overweight or 
obesity and MASLD. There is consensus 
that a minimum weight loss goal of 5%, 
preferably ≥10%, is needed to improve 
liver histology (176,197,205,208), with 
fibrosis requiring the larger weight re­
duction to promote change (239,240). 
However, there is significant individual 
variability in histological outcomes with 
weight loss. Individualized, structured 
weight loss and exercise programs offer 
greater benefit than standard counsel­
ing in people with MASLD (241).
Nutrition plan recommendations to in­
duce an energy deficit are not different 
from those for individuals with diabetes 
with obesity without MASLD and should 
include a reduction of macronutrient 
content, limiting saturated fat, refined 
carbohydrates, and added sugar, with 
adoption of healthier eating patterns. The 
Mediterranean eating pattern has the best 
evidence for improving liver and cardiome­
tabolic health (205–208,241,242). Both 
aerobic and resistance training improve 
MASLD in proportion to treatment en­
gagement and intensity of the program 
(243). Obesity pharmacotherapy may 
assist with weight loss in the context of 
lifestyle modification if not achieved by 
lifestyle modification alone (see section 8, 
S78 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
“Obesity and Weight Management for the 
Prevention and Treatment of Diabetes”).
Given the high prevalence of at-risk 
MASH (∼12–20%) (178,179,181,182), 
higher risk of disease progression and 
liver-related mortality (180,196,244), and 
the lack of pharmacological treatments 
once cirrhosis is established (245,246), 
optimizing the pharmacological manage­
ment of hyperglycemia and obesity in indi­
viduals with type 2 diabetes and MASH 
could serve the dual purpose of addressing 
these comorbidities while treating the liver 
disease (Fig. 4.3). Therefore, early diagnosis 
and treatment of MASLD offers the best 
opportunity for cirrhosis prevention. In 
phase 2 clinical trials, pioglitazone and 
some GLP-1 RAs have been shown to be 
potentially effective to treat steatohepa­
titis (205,247–250) and to slow fibrosis 
progression (251,252). They may also 
decrease CVD (248), which is the num­
ber one cause of death in individuals 
with type 2 diabetes and MASLD (200). 
Recently, a phase 3 clinical trial exam­
ined the effect of semaglutide in subjects 
with MASH without cirrhosis (ESSENCE) 
(253). The trial reported that in 36.8% 
of individuals treated for 72 weeks with 
semaglutide 2.4 mg subcutaneously once 
weekly, improvement in liver fibrosis was 
achieved with no worsening of steatohe­
patitis, compared with 22.4% on placebo 
(P < 0.001), while 62.9% achieved resolu­
tion of steatohepatitis with no worsen­
ing of liver fibrosis, compared with 34.3% 
on placebo (P < 0.001). Based on the 
phase 3 trial results, the FDA recently ap­
proved semaglutide for the treatment of 
MASH with moderate to advanced liver fi­
brosis (254).
MASLD
with F0-F1
Compensated
cirrhosis
Decompensated
cirrhosis
MASLD 
with F2-F3
(“at risk” 
MASH)
Obesity 
pharmacotherapy
Diabetes 
pharmacotherapy
MASH 
pharmacotherapy
Not indicated
Obesity 
pharmacotherapy
Diabetes 
pharmacotherapy
MASH 
pharmacotherapy
Resmetirom,
Obesity 
pharmacotherapy
Diabetes 
pharmacotherapy
MASH 
pharmacotherapy
with caution*
 AVOID
Obesity 
pharmacotherapy
Diabetes 
pharmacotherapy
MASH 
pharmacotherapy
 AVOID
Only use insulin
 AVOID
Individualize care, 
targeting the 
following:
• Adoption of a
healthy lifestyle
• Weight loss (if indicated)
• Optimal diabetes
management
• Cardiovascular
risk reduction
• Need for metabolic
surgery (as recommended
by guidelines)
Metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) treatment algorithm
† Only semaglutide among GLP-1 RAs has been approved by the FDA for treatment of MASH.
* Individualized care and close monitoring needed in compensated cirrhosis given limited safety data available.
Prefer GLP-1 RA,
dual GIP and
GLP-1 RA
Prefer GLP-1 RA,
dual GIP and
GLP-1 RA
As with F2-F3
with caution*
Prefer GLP-1 RA,
dual GIP and GLP-
1 RA, pioglitazone,
SGLT2i
Prefer GLP-1 RA,
dual GIP and GLP-
1 RA, pioglitazone
As with F2-F3 
GLP-1 RA†
Figure 4.3—Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) treatment algorithm. F0-F1, no to minimal fibrosis; F2-F3, moderate 
fibrosis; F4, cirrhosis; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; MASH, metabolic 
dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis; SGLT2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor. 
Semaglutide is currently the only 
glucose-lowering or obesity medication 
that is FDA approved for the treatment of 
MASH. The recommendation to treat hy­
perglycemia with other GLP-1 RA–based 
therapies and/or pioglitazone in individu­
als with type 2 diabetes and MASLD is 
based on consistent histological benefit 
for steatohepatitis in several phase 2 ran­
domized controlled trials (RCTs) with GLP- 
1 RAs (254–259) and with pioglitazone 
(255,256) compared with no benefit with 
metformin or other glucose-lowering 
medications in MASH (176,197,205).
Pioglitazone improves glucose and lipid 
metabolism and reverses steatohepatitis 
in individuals with prediabetes or type 2 
diabetes (252,255,257) and even in indi­
viduals without diabetes (256,258,259) 
(Fig. 4.3). Fibrosis also improved in some 
trials (247,259). A meta-analysis (251) 
concluded that pioglitazone treatment re­
sults in resolution of MASH and may im­
prove fibrosis. Furthermore, combination 
therapy with pioglitazone plus a GLP-1 
RA has been reported safe and effective 
for the treatment of hyperglycemia in 
adults with type 2 diabetes (260–263) as 
well as in reducing hepatic steatosis 
(260,262), suggesting additive benefit in 
individuals with MASLD. It is important 
diabetesjournals.org/care
   Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S79 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
to note that these studies are based on 
phase 2 clinical trials and await further 
phase 3 evidence. However, these plans 
are attractive because they offer poten­
tial benefit compared with lack of histo­
logical benefit (or clinical trial data) from 
other oral glucose-lowering therapies in 
MASLD. In the context of treating hyper­
glycemia in individuals with type 2 diabe­
tes with MASLD, where the low cost of 
pioglitazone and any liver improvement 
would be an added benefit to glycemic 
management, these plans would be po­
tentially cost-effective for the treatment 
of MASLD (264,265). Vitamin E may be 
beneficial for the treatment of MASH in 
individuals without diabetes (258). How­
ever, in individuals with type 2 diabetes, 
vitamin E monotherapy was found to be 
ineffective in a small RCT (252), and it did 
not seem to enhance pioglitazone’s efficacy 
when used in combination, as reported in 
an earlier trial in this population (257). Pio­
glitazone causes dose-dependent weight 
gain (15 mg/day, mean weight gain of 
1–2%; 45 mg/day, mean weight gain of 
3–5%), which can be blunted or reversed 
if combined with SGLT2 inhibitors or 
GLP-1 RAs (248,262,263,266). Pioglitazone 
increases fracture risk, may promote heart 
failure if used in individuals with preexisting 
congestive heart failure, and may increase 
the risk of bladder cancer, although this re­
mains controversial (176,197,205,248,249).
GLP-1 RAs are effective at inducing 
weight loss and ameliorating elevated 
plasma aminotransferases and steatosis 
(247) (Fig. 4.3). As discussed above, 
semaglutide was effective as a treat­
ment for MASH with moderate to ad­
vanced liver fibrosis in a phase 3 RCT 
(253). However, there are few phase 2 
RCTs of other GLP-1 RAs in individuals 
with MASH proven by biopsy. A small 
RCT reported that liraglutide improved 
some features of MASH and may delay 
fibrosis progression (267). Tirzepatide is 
a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA known to re­
duce liver steatosis in MASLD (268), and 
a phase 2 paired-biopsy study of 190 
adults with overweight or obesity with 
MASH (50–60% of whom had type 2 di­
abetes) recently reported that doses of 
5, 10, and 15 mg/day resulted in resolu­
tion of steatohepatitis without worsen­
ing of fibrosis in 44%, 56%, and 62% of 
participants, respectively, compared with 
10% of participants receiving placebo 
(P < 0.001 for all three comparisons) (269). 
Improvement of at least one fibrosis stage 
without worsening of MASH occurred in 
55%, 51%, and 51% of participants, respec­
tively, compared with 30% of participants 
receiving placebo. Survodutide is a dual 
GLP-1 and glucagon receptor agonist that 
is in development, and a phase 2 paired- 
biopsy trial recently reported benefit in 
MASH (270). In summary, other GLP-1–
based therapies (besides semaglutide) 
and/or pioglitazone are recommended 
to treat type 2 diabetes in adults with 
MASH based on histological benefit for 
steatohepatitis in several phase 2 RCTs 
(269,270) compared with no benefit with 
metformin or other glucose-lowering or 
obesity medications. Within the context of 
their approved indication (e.g., obesity 
or type 2 diabetes), these medications 
are cost-effective to treat the comor­
bidity, while potentially improving MASH, 
which becomes an added benefit.
SGLT2 inhibitors (271–273) and insu­
lin (249) reduce hepatic steatosis, but 
their effects on steatohepatitis remain 
unknown. The use of glucose-lowering 
agents other than pioglitazone or GLP-1 RAs 
may be continued in individuals with type 2 
diabetes and MASLD for glycemic manage­
ment, as clinically indicated. However, these 
agents have either failed to improve steato­
hepatitis in paired-biopsy studies (metfor­
min) or have no RCTs with liver histological 
end points (i.e., sulfonylureas, glitinides, 
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors, or 
acarbose).
Resmetirom is a thyroid hormone 
receptor-β agonist approved by the FDA 
for the treatment of adults with MASLD 
with moderate (F2) or advanced (F3) 
liver fibrosis on liver histology or a vali­
dated imaging- or blood-based test. In a 
phase 3 RCT, resmetirom for 52 weeks 
in 966 adults at the highest dose of 
100 mg (or placebo) met the primary end 
point of MASH resolution without wors­
ening of fibrosis in 29.9% of individuals com­
pared with 9.7% on placebo (P < 0.001) 
(274). Fibrosis improved in up to 25.9% and 
14.2%, respectively (P < 0.001). Nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhea occurred more often 
with resmetirom. The gastrointestinal side 
effects are dose dependent and improve 
with continued treatment. Resmetirom 
decreased free thyroxine (T4) levels by 
∼20% and increased sex hormone-binding 
protein levels two- to threefold. Although 
a recent review of the data concluded 
that there is little concern about these 
changes, long-term postmarketing data 
must be collected (275). Guidance by the 
American Association for the Study of 
Liver Diseases (AASLD) about optimal indi­
vidual identification for treatment, safety, 
and long-term monitoring has recently 
been published (276). This is especially rel­
evant because hypothyroidism and hypo­
gonadism are more prevalent in people 
with MASLD than in the general population 
(176,205), and clinicians should monitor all 
individuals with MASLD for symptoms of 
endocrine deficiency and manage accord­
ing to clinical practice guidelines. Per its la­
bel, candidates for resmetirom treatment 
are those with MASLD and moderate (F2) 
to advanced (F3) liver fibrosis but not with 
cirrhosis or other active liver disease (i.e., 
alcohol-related liver disease, autoimmune 
hepatitis, or primary biliary cholangitis) or 
inadequately managed hypothyroidism or 
hyperthyroidism. Given complexities asso­
ciated with selection of an individual for 
therapy, drug cost, and treatment monitor­
ing, therapy should be individualized and 
initiated by a hepatologist or gastroenterol­
ogist with expertise in MASH within an inter­
professional team.
Insulin is the preferred glucose-lowering 
agent for the treatment of hyperglyce­
mia in adults with type 2 diabetes with 
decompensated cirrhosis given the lack 
of robust evidence about the safety and 
efficacy of oral agents and noninsulin in­
jectables (i.e., GLP-1 RAs and dual GIP 
and GLP-1 RAs) (246), although a recent 
48-week study suggested that GLP-1 
RAs are safe in individuals with MASH 
and compensated cirrhosis (277).
Metabolic surgery leading to sustained 
weight loss and improvement of type 2 
diabetes can improve MASH and cardio­
metabolic health, altering the natural his­
tory of the disease (278). Meta-analyses 
report that 70–80% of people have im­
provement in hepatic steatosis, 50–75% 
of people have improvement in inflam­
mation and hepatocyte ballooning (necrosis), 
and 30–40% of people have improvement in 
fibrosis (279,280). It may also reduce the risk 
of HCC (280). It is important to note that cur­
rently metabolic surgery is not indicated 
solely for treatment of MASH. Given that 
many individuals with MASH have meta­
bolic risks (type 2 diabetes and obesity) 
that are indications for metabolic surgery, 
the improvement in liver health is ex­
pected, but surgical indication should 
follow current practice guidelines. Meta­
bolic surgery should be used with cau­
tion in individuals with compensated 
cirrhosis (i.e., asymptomatic stage of 
S80 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
cirrhosis without associated liver compli­
cations), but with experienced surgeons 
the risk of hepatic decompensation is 
similar to that for individuals with less 
advanced liver disease. Because of the 
paucity of safety and outcome data, 
metabolic surgery is not recommended 
in individuals with decompensated cirrho­
sis (i.e., cirrhosis stage with complications 
such as variceal hemorrhage, ascites, he­
patic encephalopathy, or jaundice) who 
also have a much higher risk of postopera­
tive development of these liver-related 
complications (176,197,205).
Adults with type 2 diabetes and MASLD 
are at an increased risk of CVD and re­
quire comprehensive management of 
cardiovascular risk factors (176,197,205). 
Within an interprofessional approach, statin 
therapy should be initiated or continued 
for cardiovascular risk reduction as clinically 
indicated. Overall, its use appears to be 
safe in adults with type 2 diabetes and 
MASH, including in the presence of com­
pensated cirrhosis (Child-Pugh class A or B 
cirrhosis) from MASLD. Some studies even 
suggest that statin use in individuals with 
chronic liver disease may reduce episodes 
of hepatic decompensation and/or overall 
mortality (281,282). Statin therapy is not 
recommended in decompensated cirrhosis 
given limited safety and efficacy data 
(176,197,206).
Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Age-adjusted rates of obstructive sleep 
apnea, a risk factor for CVD, are signifi­
cantly higher (4- to 10-fold) with obe­
sity, especially with central obesity (283) 
(see section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health 
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve 
Health Outcomes”). The prevalence of ob­
structive sleep apnea in the population 
with type 2 diabetes may be as high as 
23%, and the prevalence of any sleep-di­
sordered breathing may be as high as 58% 
(284,285). In participants with obesity and 
type 2 diabetes enrolled in the Look 
AHEAD trial, the prevalence exceeded 
80% (286). Obstructive sleep apnea should 
be evaluated in individuals with suggestive 
symptoms (e.g., excessive daytime sleepi­
ness, snoring, and witnessed apnea) (287). 
Sleep apnea treatment (lifestyle modifica­
tion, continuous positive airway pressure, 
oral appliances, and surgery) significantly 
improves quality of life and blood pressure 
management. Recently, two phase 3 ran­
domized trials found that among adults 
with obesity and moderate-to-severe ob­
structive sleep apnea but without diabe­
tes, treatment with the dual GIP and 
GLP-1 RA tirzepatide substantially reduced 
sleep apnea severity (288). More research 
is needed to determine the effects of 
GLP-1 and dual GIP and GLP-1 RAs on sleep 
apnea in individuals with diabetes.
Pancreatitis
Diabetes is linked to diseases of the 
exocrine pancreas, such as pancreatitis, 
which may disrupt the global architecture 
or physiology of the pancreas, often re­
sulting in both exocrine and endocrine 
dysfunction. Up to half of individuals with 
diabetes may have some degree of im­
paired exocrine pancreas function (289). 
People with diabetes are at an approxi­
mately twofold higher risk of developing 
acute pancreatitis (290).
Conversely, prediabetes and/or diabe­
tes has been found to develop in approx­
imately one-third of individuals after an 
episode of acute pancreatitis (291); thus, 
the relationship is likely bidirectional. Post­
pancreatitis diabetes may include either 
new-onset disease or previously unrecog­
nized diabetes (292). Studies of individuals 
treated with incretin-based therapies for 
diabetes have also reported that pancre­
atitis may occur more frequently with 
these medications, but results have been 
mixed and causality has not been estab­
lished (293,294).
Islet autotransplantation should be 
considered for individuals requiring total 
pancreatectomy for medically refractory 
chronic pancreatitis to prevent postsur­
gical diabetes. Approximately one-third 
of individuals undergoing total pancrea­
tectomy with islet autotransplantation 
are insulin free 1 year postoperatively, 
and observational studies from different 
centers have demonstrated islet graft 
function up to a decade after the sur­
gery in some individuals (294–298). Both 
personal factors for the individual with 
diabetes and disease factors should be 
carefully considered when deciding the 
indications and timing of this surgery. 
Surgeries should be performed in skilled 
facilities that have demonstrated exper­
tise in islet autotransplantation.
Sensory Impairment
Hearing impairment, both in high-frequency 
and low- to midfrequency ranges, is more 
common in people with diabetes than in 
those without, with stronger associations 
found in studies of younger people (299). 
Proposed pathophysiologic mechanisms 
include the combined contributions of hy­
perglycemia and oxidative stress with co­
chlear microangiopathy and auditory 
neuropathy (300). In a National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 
analysis, hearing impairment was about 
twice as prevalent in individuals with dia­
betes as in those without, after adjusting 
for age and other risk factors for hearing 
impairment (301). Low HDL cholesterol, 
coronary heart disease, peripheral neu­
ropathy, and general poor health have 
been reported as risk factors for hearing 
impairment for individuals with diabetes, 
but an association of hearing loss with gly­
cemia has not been consistently observed 
(302). In the DCCT/EDIC cohort, increases 
in the time-weighted mean A1C was asso­
ciated with increased risk of hearing im­
pairment when tested after long-term 
(>20 years) follow-up, with every 10% 
increase in A1C leading to 19% high- 
frequency impairment (303). Impairment 
in smell, but not taste, has also been re­
ported in individuals with diabetes (304).
References
1. Goh LH, Siah CJR, Tam WWS, Tai ES, Young 
DYL. Effectiveness of the chronic care model for 
adults with type 2 diabetes in primary care: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Syst Rev 
2022;11:273
2. Rodriguez K, Ryan D, Dickinson JK, Phan V. 
Improving quality outcomes: the value of diabetes 
care and education specialists. Clin Diabetes 2022; 
40:356–365
3. Dickinson JK, Guzman SJ, Maryniuk MD, et al. 
The use of language in diabetes care and 
education. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1790–1799
4. Ji M, Sereika SM, Dunbar-Jacob J, Erlen JA. 
Correlation of symptom distress, self-efficacy, 
and social support with problem-solving and 
glycemic control among patients with type 2 
diabetes. Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 2021;47: 
85–93
5. Beverly EA, Hughes AS, Saunders A. Examination 
of health care providers’ use of language in diabetes 
care: a secondary qualitative data analysis. Clin 
Diabetes 2022;40:434–441
6. Issa AN, Wodi AP, Moser CA, Cineas S. Advisory 
committee on immunization practices recommended 
immunization schedule for children and adolescents 
aged 18 years or younger - United States, 2025. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2025;74:26–29
7. Wodi AP, Issa AN, Moser CA, Cineas S. 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults 
Aged 19 Years or Older - United States, 2025. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2025;74:30–33
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practice 
(ACIP). ACIP Evidence to Recommendation User’s 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S81 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Guide, 2020. Accessed 25 August 2025. Available 
from https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/127248
9. Goeijenbier M, van Sloten TT, Slobbe L, et al. 
Benefits of flu vaccination for persons with diabetes 
mellitus: a review. Vaccine 2017;35:5095–5101
10. Behrouzi B, Bhatt DL, Cannon CP, et al. 
Association of influenza vaccination with car- 
diovascular risk: a meta-analysis. JAMA Netw 
Open 2022;5:e228873
11. Kornum JB, Thomsen RW, Riis A, Lervang 
H-H, Schønheyder HC, Sørensen HT. Diabetes, 
glycemic control, and risk of hospitalization with 
pneumonia: a population-based case-control 
study. Diabetes Care 2008;31:1541–1545
12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Expanded Recommendations for Use of 
Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccines Among Adults 
Aged ≥50 Years: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices — 
United States, 2024. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report (MMWR) 2025;74:1–8
13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
Recommended Immunization Schedule for Adults 
Aged 19 Years or Older — United States, 2025. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2025;74:30–33
14. Britton A, Roper LE, Kotton CN, et al. Use of 
respiratory syncytial virus vaccines in adults aged 
≥60 years: updated recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices - 
United States, 2024. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2024;73:696–702
15. Tinetti ME, Fried TR, Boyd CM. Designing 
health care for the most common chronic 
condition–multimorbidity. JAMA 2012;307: 
2493–2494
16. Sudore RL, Karter AJ, Huang ES, et al. 
Symptom burden of adults with type 2 diabetes 
across the disease course: diabetes & aging 
study. J Gen Intern Med 2012;27:1674–1681
17. Nederstigt C, Uitbeijerse BS, Janssen LGM, 
Corssmit EPM, de Koning EJP, Dekkers OM. 
Associated auto-immune disease in type 1 diabetes 
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Eur J Endocrinol 2019;180:135–144
18. Hughes JW, Riddlesworth TD, DiMeglio LA, 
Miller KM, Rickels MR, McGill JB; T1D Exchange 
Clinic Network. Autoimmune diseases in children 
and adults with type 1 diabetes from the T1D 
Exchange Clinic Registry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2016;101:4931–4937
19. Kahaly GJ, Hansen MP. Type 1 diabetes 
associated autoimmunity. Autoimmun Rev 2016; 
15:644–648
20. Eisenbarth GS, Gottlieb PA. Autoimmune 
polyendocrine syndromes. N Engl J Med 2004; 
350:2068–2079
21. Pham-Short A, Donaghue KC, Ambler G, 
Phelan H, Twigg S, Craig ME. Screening for celiac 
disease in type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. 
Pediatrics 2015;136:e170–e176
22. Cauley JA, Hochberg MC, Lui L-Y, et al. Long- 
term risk of incident vertebral fractures. JAMA 
2007;298:2761–2767
23. Kanis JA, Johnell O, De Laet C, et al. A meta- 
analysis of previous fracture and subsequent 
fracture risk. Bone 2004;35:375–382
24. Pedersen AB, Ehrenstein V, Szépligeti SK, et al. 
Thirty-five-year trends in first-time hospitalization for 
hip fracture, 1-year mortality, and the prognostic 
impact of comorbidity: a Danish Nationwide Cohort 
Study, 1980–2014. Epidemiology 2017;28:898–905
25. Tajeu GS, Delzell E, Smith W, et al. Death, 
debility, and destitution following hip fracture. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2014;69:346–353
26. Miao J, Brismar K, Nyrén O, Ugarph-Morawski 
A, Ye W. Elevated hip fracture risk in type 1 diabetic 
patients: a population-based cohort study in 
Sweden. Diabetes Care 2005;28:2850–2855
27. Wang H, Ba Y, Xing Q, Du J-L. Diabetes 
mellitus and the risk of fractures at specific sites: 
a meta-analysis. BMJ Open 2019;9:e024067
28. Weber DR, Haynes K, Leonard MB, Willi SM, 
Denburg MR. Type 1 diabetes is associated with 
an increased risk of fracture across the life span: 
a population-based cohort study using The 
Health Improvement Network (THIN). Diabetes 
Care 2015;38:1913–1920
29. Leanza G, Maddaloni E, Pitocco D, et al. Risk 
factors for fragility fractures in type 1 diabetes. 
Bone 2019;125:194–199
30. Janghorbani M, Van Dam RM, Willett WC, 
Hu FB. Systematic review of type 1 and type 2 
diabetes mellitus and risk of fracture. Am J 
Epidemiol 2007;166:495–505
31. Napoli N, Schwartz AV, Schafer AL, et al.; 
Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study 
Research Group. Vertebral fracture risk in diabetic 
elderly men: the MrOS study. J Bone Miner Res 
2018;33:63–69
32. Koromani F, Oei L, Shevroja E, et al. Vertebral 
fractures in individuals with type 2 diabetes: more 
than skeletal complications alone. Diabetes Care 
2020;43:137–144
33. Faraj M, Schwartz AV, Burghardt AJ, et al. 
Risk factors for bone microarchitecture impairments 
in older men with type 2 diabetes - the MrOS study. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2025;110:e1660–e1669
34. Schwartz AV, Vittinghoff E, Bauer DC, et al.; 
Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) Research 
Group; Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) 
Research Group; Health, Aging, and Body 
Composition (Health ABC) Research Group. 
Association of BMD and FRAX score with risk 
of fracture in older adults with type 2 diabetes. 
JAMA 2011;305:2184–2192
35. Hidayat K, Fang Q-L, Shi B-M, Qin L-Q. 
Influence of glycemic control and hypoglycemia 
on the risk of fracture in patients with diabetes 
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis 
of observational studies. Osteoporos Int 2021;32: 
1693–1704
36. Wang B, Wang Z, Poundarik AA, et al. 
Unmasking fracture risk in type 2 diabetes: the 
association of longitudinal glycemic hemoglobin 
level and medications. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2022;107:e1390–e1401
37. Komorita Y, Iwase M, Fujii H, et al. Both 
hypo- and hyperglycaemia are associated with 
increased fracture risk in Japanese people with 
type 2 diabetes: the Fukuoka Diabetes Registry. 
Diabet Med 2020;37:838–847
38. Majumdar SR, Leslie WD, Lix LM, et al. Longer 
duration of diabetes strongly impacts fracture risk 
assessment: the Manitoba BMD cohort. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:4489–4496
39. Van Hulten V, Driessen JHM, Andersen S, et 
al. Fracture risk revisited: bone mineral density T- 
score and fracture risk in type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2024;26:5325–5335
40. Napoli N, Strollo R, Paladini A, Briganti SI, 
Pozzilli P, Epstein S. Corrigendum to “The Alliance 
of Mesenchymal Stem Cells, Bone, and Diabetes. 
Int J Endocrinol 2017;2017:5924671
41. Vavanikunnel J, Charlier S, Becker C, et al. 
Association between glycemic control and risk of 
fracture in diabetic patients: a nested case-control 
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;104:1645–1654
42. Strotmeyer ES, Cauley JA, Schwartz AV, et al. 
Nontraumatic fracture risk with diabetes mellitus 
and impaired fasting glucose in older white and 
black adults: the health, aging, and body composition 
study. Arch Intern Med 2005;165:1612–1617
43. Schwartz AV, Vittinghoff E, Sellmeyer DE, et 
al.; Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study. 
Diabetes-related complications, glycemic control, 
and falls in older adults. Diabetes Care 2008; 
31:391–396
44. Piccoli A, Cannata F, Strollo R, et al. Sclerostin 
regulation, microarchitecture, and advanced glycation 
end-products in the bone of elderly women with 
type 2 diabetes. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:2415–2422
45. Leanza G, Cannata F, Faraj M, et al. Bone 
canonical Wnt signaling is downregulated in 
type 2 diabetes and associates with higher 
advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) content 
and reduced bone strength. Elife 2024;12: 
RP90437
46. Tramontana F, Napoli N, Litwack-Harrison S, 
et al. More rapid bone mineral density loss in 
older men with diabetes: the Osteoporotic Fractures 
in Men (MrOS) Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2024;109:e2283–e2290
47. Ferrari SL, Abrahamsen B, Napoli N, et al.; 
Bone and Diabetes Working Group of IOF. 
Diagnosis and management of bone fragility in 
diabetes: an emerging challenge. Osteoporos Int 
2018;29:2585–2596
48. Leslie WD, Johansson H, McCloskey EV, 
Harvey NC, Kanis JA, Hans D. Comparison of 
methods for improving fracture risk assessment 
in diabetes: the Manitoba BMD Registry. J Bone 
Miner Res 2018;33:1923–1930
49. Ferrari S, Eastell R, Napoli N, et al. 
Denosumab in postmenopausal women with 
osteoporosis and diabetes: subgroup analysis of 
FREEDOM and FREEDOM extension. Bone 2020; 
134:115268
50. Napoli N, Conte C, Eastell R, et al. Bone 
turnover markers do not predict fracture risk in 
type 2 diabetes. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:2363–2371
51. International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent 
Diabetes. ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 
2022. Accessed 25 August 2025. Available from 
https://www.ispad.org/resources/ispad-clinical- 
practice-consensus-guidelines/2022-ispad-clinical- 
practice-consensus-guidelines/ispad-cpcg-2022- 
english.html
52. LeBoff MS, Greenspan SL, Insogna KL, et al. 
The clinician’s guide to prevention and treatment 
of osteoporosis. Osteoporos Int 2022;33:2049–2102
53. Armamento-Villareal R, Aguirre L, Napoli N, 
et al. Changes in thigh muscle volume predict 
bone mineral density response to lifestyle therapy 
in frail, obese older adults. Osteoporos Int 2014; 
25:551–558
54. Ebeling PR, Adler RA, Jones G, et al. 
Management of endocrine disease: therapeutics 
of vitamin D. Eur J Endocrinol 2018;179:R239–R259
55. Maddaloni E, Cavallari I, Napoli N, Conte C. 
Vitamin D and diabetes mellitus. Front Horm Res 
2018;50:161–176
56. Iolascon G, Gimigliano R, Bianco M, et al. Are 
dietary supplements and nutraceuticals effective 
for musculoskeletal health and cognitive function? 
S82 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
A scoping review. J Nutr Health Aging 2017;21: 
527–538
57. National Institutes of Health. Calcium—fact 
sheet for health professionals. Accessed 27 August 
2025. Available from https://ods.od.nih.gov/ 
factsheets/Calcium-HealthProfessional
58. Rosen CJ, Abrams SA, Aloia JF, et al. IOM 
committee members respond to Endocrine Society 
vitamin D guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2012; 
97:1146–1152
59. National Institutes of Health. Vitamin D— 
fact sheet for health professionals. Accessed 
27 August 2025. Available from https://ods.od 
.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional
60. Carmel AS, Shieh A, Bang H, Bockman RS. The 
25(OH)D level needed to maintain a favorable 
bisphosphonate response is ≥33 ng/ml. Osteoporos 
Int 2012;23:2479–2487
61. Holick MF, Siris ES, Binkley N, et al. Prevalence 
of vitamin D inadequacy among postmenopausal 
North American women receiving osteoporosis 
therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2005;90:3215–3224
62. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin 
D, Calcium, or Combined Supplementation for 
the Primary Prevention of Falls and Fractures in 
Community-Dwelling Adults: preventive Medication. 
Accessed 25 September 2025. Available from 
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/ 
uspstf/draft-recommendation/vitamin-d-calcium- 
combined-supplementation-primary-prevention- 
falls-fractures-communitydwelling-adults.
63. Sinclair AJ, Abdelhafiz A, Dunning T, et al. An 
international position statement on the management 
of frailty in diabetes mellitus: summary of 
recommendations 2017. J Frailty Aging 2018; 
7:10–20
64. Eastell R, Vittinghoff E, Lui L-Y, et al. Diabetes 
mellitus and the benefit of antiresorptive therapy 
on fracture risk. J Bone Miner Res 2022;37: 
2121–2131
65. Langdahl BL, Silverman S, Fujiwara S, et al. 
Real-world effectiveness of teriparatide on 
fracture reduction in patients with osteoporosis 
and comorbidities or risk factors for fractures: 
integrated analysis of 4 prospective observational 
studies. Bone 2018;116:58–66
66. Schwartz AV, Pavo I, Alam J, et al. Teriparatide 
in patients with osteoporosis and type 2 diabetes. 
Bone 2016;91:152–158
67. Napoli N, Pannacciulli N, Vittinghoff E, et al. 
Effect of denosumab on fasting glucose in women 
with diabetes or prediabetes from the FREEDOM 
trial. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2018;34:e2991
68. Tsur A, Cahn A, Levy L, Pollack R. Cardiovascular 
outcomes of romosozumab treatment-real-world 
data analysis. JBMR Plus 2025;9:ziae146
69. Langdahl BL, Hofbauer LC, Forfar JC. 
Cardiovascular safety and sclerostin inhibition. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2021;106:1845–1853
70. Cosman F, Crittenden DB, Adachi JD, et al. 
Romosozumab treatment in postmenopausal 
women with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2016; 
375:1532–1543
71. Conley RB, Adib G, Adler RA, et al. 
Secondary fracture prevention: consensus clinical 
recommendations from a multistakeholder 
coalition. J Bone Miner Res 2020;35:36–52
72. Hofbauer LC, Rachner TD. More DATA to 
guide sequential osteoporosis therapy. Lancet 
2015;386:1116–1118
73. Palermo A, D’Onofrio L, Eastell R, Schwartz 
AV, Pozzilli P, Napoli N. Oral anti-diabetic drugs 
and fracture risk, cut to the bone: safe or 
dangerous? A narrative review. Osteoporos Int 
2015;26:2073–2089
74. Maddaloni E, Coleman RL, Holman RR. Risk 
factors for bone fractures in type 2 diabetes and 
the impact of once-weekly exenatide: insights 
from an EXSCEL post-hoc analysis. Diabetes Res 
Clin Pract 2025;223:112125
75. Loke YK, Singh S, Furberg CD. Long-term use 
of thiazolidinediones and fractures in type 2 
diabetes: a meta-analysis. CMAJ 2009;180:32–39
76. Dormandy J, Bhattacharya M, van Troostenburg 
de Bruyn A-R; PROactive Investigators. Safety and 
tolerability of pioglitazone in high-risk patients with 
type 2 diabetes: an overview of data from PROactive. 
Drug Saf 2009;32:187–202
77. Schwartz AV, Chen H, Ambrosius WT, et al. 
Effects of TZD use and discontinuation on 
fracture rates in ACCORD bone study. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:4059–4066
78. Hidayat K, Du X, Wu M-J, Shi B-M. The 
use of metformin, insulin, sulphonylureas, and 
thiazolidinediones and the risk of fracture: systematic 
review and meta-analysis of observational studies. 
Obes Rev 2019;20:1494–1503
79. Napoli N, Strotmeyer ES, Ensrud KE, et al. 
Fracture risk in diabetic elderly men: the MrOS 
study. Diabetologia 2014;57:2057–2065
80. Hidayat K, Du X, Shi B-M. Risk of fracture 
with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, glucagon- 
like peptide-1 receptor agonists, or sodium- 
glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors in real-world 
use: systematic review and meta-analysis of 
observational studies. Osteoporos Int 2019;30: 
1923–1940
81. Chai S, Liu F, Yang Z, et al. Risk of fracture 
with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, glucagon- 
like peptide-1 receptor agonists, or sodium- 
glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors in patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic 
review and network meta-analysis combining 
177 randomized controlled trials with a median 
follow-up of 26 weeks. Front Pharmacol 2022; 
13:825417
82. Karam L, Mabilleau G, Paccou J. Effects of 
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists on 
bone health in people living with obesity. 
Osteoporos Int. 8 September 2025 [Epub ahead 
of print]. DOI: 10.1007/s00198-025-07664-1
83. Bilezikian JP, Watts NB, Usiskin K, et al. 
Evaluation of bone mineral density and bone 
biomarkers in patients with type 2 diabetes 
treated with canagliflozin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2016;101:44–51
84. Watts NB, Bilezikian JP, Usiskin K, et al. 
Effects of canagliflozin on fracture risk in patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2016;101:157–166
85. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al.; CREDENCE 
Trial Investigators. Canagliflozin and renal outcomes 
in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. N Engl J Med 
2019;380:2295–2306
86. Neal B, Perkovic V, Matthews DR. Canagliflozin 
and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2 
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2017;377:2099
87. Li X, Li T, Cheng Y, et al. Effects of SGLT2 
inhibitors on fractures and bone mineral density 
in type 2 diabetes: an updated meta-analysis. 
Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2019;35:e3170
88. Suh S, Kim KW. Diabetes and cancer: cancer 
should be screened in routine diabetes assessment. 
Diabetes Metab J 2019;43:733–743
89. Giovannucci E, Harlan DM, Archer MC, et al. 
Diabetes and cancer: a consensus report. CA 
Cancer J Clin 2010;60:207–221
90. Aggarwal G, Kamada P, Chari ST. Prevalence 
of diabetes mellitus in pancreatic cancer compared 
to common cancers. Pancreas 2013;42:198–201
91. Cho J, Scragg R, Petrov MS. Postpancreatitis 
diabetes confers higher risk for pancreatic cancer 
than type 2 diabetes: results from a nationwide 
cancer registry. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2106–2112
92. Ninomiya I, Yamazaki K, Oyama K, et al. 
Pioglitazone inhibits the proliferation and metastasis 
of human pancreatic cancer cells. Oncol Lett 2014; 
8:2709–2714
93. Hendriks AM, Schrijnders D, Kleefstra N, et 
al. Sulfonylurea derivatives and cancer, friend or 
foe? Eur J Pharmacol 2019;861:172598
94. Hua Y, Zheng Y, Yao Y, Jia R, Ge S, Zhuang A. 
Metformin and cancer hallmarks: shedding new 
lights on therapeutic repurposing. J Transl Med 
2023;21:403
95. Wang L, Xu R, Kaelber DC, Berger NA. 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists and 13 
obesity-associated cancers in patients with type 2 
diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2024;7:e2421305
96. Morales DR, Bu F, Viernes B, et al. Risk of 
thyroid tumors with glp-1 receptor agonists: a 
retrospective cohort study. Diabetes Care 2025; 
48:1386–1394
97. Xue M, Xu W, Ou Y-N, et al. Diabetes mellitus 
and risks of cognitive impairment and dementia: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of 144 
prospective studies. Ageing Res Rev 2019;55: 
100944
98. Ohara T, Doi Y, Ninomiya T, et al. Glucose 
tolerance status and risk of dementia in the 
community: the Hisayama study. Neurology 
2011;77:1126–1134
99. Kciuk M, Kruczkowska W, GałeRziewska J, et 
al. Alzheimer’s disease as type 3 diabetes: 
understanding the link and implications. Int J Mol 
Sci 2024;25:11955
100. Hanyu H. Diabetes-related dementia. Adv 
Exp Med Biol 2019;1128:147–160
101. Gudala K, Bansal D, Schifano F, Bhansali A. 
Diabetes mellitus and risk of dementia: a meta- 
analysis of prospective observational studies. J 
Diabetes Investig 2013;4:640–650
102. Tang X, Cardoso MA, Yang J, Zhou J-B, Simó 
R. Impact of intensive glucose control on brain 
health: meta-analysis of cumulative data from 
16,584 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Diabetes Ther 2021;12:765–779
103. Launer LJ, Miller ME, Williamson JD, et al.; 
ACCORD MIND investigators. Effects of intensive 
glucose lowering on brain structure and function 
in people with type 2 diabetes (ACCORD MIND): 
a randomised open-label substudy. Lancet Neurol 
2011;10:969–977
104. Xiao Y, Hong X, Neelagar R, Mo H. 
Association between glycated hemoglobin A1c 
levels, control status, and cognitive function in 
type 2 diabetes: a prospective cohort study. Sci 
Rep 2025;15:5011
105. McCoy RG, Galindo RJ, Swarna KS, et al. 
Sociodemographic, clinical, and treatment-related 
factors associated with hyperglycemic crises 
among adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes in 
the US from 2014 to 2020. JAMA Netw Open 
2021;4:e2123471
106. Mair ML, Athavale R, Abdelhafiz AH. Practical 
considerations for managing patients with diabetes 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S83 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
and dementia. Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab 2017; 
12:429–440
107. Punthakee Z, Miller ME, Launer LJ, et al.; 
ACCORD-MIND Investigators. Poor cognitive 
function and risk of severe hypoglycemia in type 2 
diabetes: post hoc epidemiologic analysis of the 
ACCORD trial. Diabetes Care 2012;35:787–793
108. Lacy ME, Gilsanz P, Eng C, Beeri MS, Karter 
AJ, Whitmer RA. Severe hypoglycemia and 
cognitive function in older adults with type 1 
diabetes: the Study of Longevity in Diabetes 
(SOLID). Diabetes Care 2020;43:541–548
109. Lee AK, Rawlings AM, Lee CJ, et al. Severe 
hypoglycaemia, mild cognitive impairment, 
dementia and brain volumes in older adults with 
type 2 diabetes: the Atherosclerosis Risk in 
Communities (ARIC) cohort study. Diabetologia 
2018;61:1956–1965
110. Ye M, Yang Q, Zhang L, et al. Effect of 
hypoglycemic events on cognitive function in 
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a dose- 
response meta-analysis. Front Neurol 2024;15: 
1394499
111. Mattishent K, Loke YK. Bi-directional 
interaction between hypoglycaemia and cognitive 
impairment in elderly patients treated with 
glucose-lowering agents: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 2016;18: 
135–141
112. Giorda CB, Ozzello A, Gentile S, et al.; 
HYPOS-1 Study Group of AMD. Incidence and risk 
factors for severe and symptomatic hypoglycemia 
in type 1 diabetes. Results of the HYPOS-1 study. 
Acta Diabetol 2015;52:845–853
113. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Braffett BH, et al.; 
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Cognitive performance 
declines in older adults with type 1 diabetes: 
results from 32 years of follow-up in the DCCT and 
EDIC Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9: 
436–445
114. Casanova L, Hughes FJ, Preshaw PM. Diabetes 
and periodontal disease: a two-way relationship. Br 
Dent J 2014;217:433–437
115. Eke PI, Thornton-Evans GO, Wei L, Borgnakke 
WS, Dye BA, Genco RJ. Periodontitis in US adults: 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
2009–2014. J Am Dent Assoc 2018;149:576–588.e6
116. Borgnakke WS, Ylöstalo PV, Taylor GW, 
Genco RJ. Effect of periodontal disease on 
diabetes: systematic review of epidemiologic 
observational evidence. J Periodontol 2013;84: 
S135–S152
117. Simpson TC, Clarkson JE, Worthington HV, 
et al. Treatment of periodontitis for glycaemic 
control in people with diabetes mellitus. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2022;4:CD004714
118. Ziemer DC, Barnes CS, Rupasinghe RSM, 
Khare S. 662-P: Oral health: neglected diabetes 
intervention. Diabetes 69(Suppl 1):662-P
119. Lipman RD, O’Brien KK, Bardsley JK, Magee 
MF. A scoping review of the relation between 
toothbrushing and diabetes knowledge, glycemic 
control, and oral health outcomes in people with 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Spectr 2023;36: 
364–372
120. Abdul Aziz AF, Mohd-Dom TN, Mustafa N, 
et al. Screening for type 2 diabetes and periodontitis 
patients (CODAPT-My): a multidisciplinary care 
approach. BMC Health Serv Res 2022;22:1034
121. Herrera D, Sanz M, Shapira L, et al. 
Association between periodontal diseases and 
cardiovascular diseases, diabetes and respiratory 
diseases: consensus report of the Joint Workshop 
by the European Federation of Periodontology 
(EFP) and the European arm of the World 
Organization of Family Doctors (WONCA Europe). 
J Clin Periodontol 2023;50:819–841
122. Lalla E, Papapanou PN. Diabetes mellitus 
and periodontitis: a tale of two common interrelated 
diseases. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2011;7:738–748
123. Christgau M, Palitzsch KD, Schmalz G, 
Kreiner U, Frenzel S. Healing response to non- 
surgical periodontal therapy in patients with 
diabetes mellitus: clinical, microbiological, and 
immunologic results. J Clin Periodontol 1998;25: 
112–124
124. Retzepi M, Donos N. The effect of diabetes 
mellitus on osseous healing. Clin Oral Implants 
Res 2010;21:673–681
125. United States Code. Americans with 
Disabilities Act of 1990. Pub. L. No. 101–336 
42 U.S.C. § 2. 104 Stat. 328. p. 101–336.
126. United States Code. Americans with Disabilities 
Act Amendments Act of 2008. Pub. L. No. 110–325 
42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq
127. Wong E, Backholer K, Gearon E, et al. 
Diabetes and risk of physical disability in adults: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol 2013;1:106–114
128. Tomic D, Shaw JE, Magliano DJ. The burden 
and risks of emerging complications of diabetes 
mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2022;18:525–539
129. Lisy K, Campbell JM, Tufanaru C, Moola S, 
Lockwood C. The prevalence of disability among 
people with cancer, cardiovascular disease, chronic 
respiratory disease and/or diabetes: a systematic 
review. Int J Evid Based Healthc 2018;16:154–166
130. Yang Y, Hu X, Zhang Q, Zou R. Diabetes 
mellitus and risk of falls in older adults: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Age Ageing 
2016;45:761–767
131. Gregg EW, Menke A. Diabetes and Disability. 
In Diabetes in America, 3rd ed. Cowie CC, 
Casagrande SS, Menke A, et al., Eds. Bethesda, 
MD, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, 2018. Available from https:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33651544
132. Khan KS, Andersen H. The Impact of 
diabetic neuropathy on activities of daily living, 
postural balance and risk of falls - a systematic 
review. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;16:289–294
133. Elafros MA, Andersen H, Bennett DL, et 
al. Towards prevention of diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy: clinical presentation, pathogenesis, 
and new treatments. Lancet Neurol 2022;21: 
922–936
134. Selvarajah D, Kar D, Khunti K, et al. Diabetic 
peripheral neuropathy: advances in diagnosis and 
strategies for screening and early intervention. 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:938–948
135. Fatma S, Noohu MM. Classification of 
functionality of people with diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy based on international classification 
of functioning, disability and health core set 
(ICF-CS) of diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes Metab 
Disord 2020;19:213–221
136. Zhang Y, Lazzarini PA, McPhail SM, van Netten 
JJ, Armstrong DG, Pacella RE. Global disability 
burdens of diabetes-related lower-extremity 
complications in 1990 and 2016. Diabetes 
Care 2020;43:964–974
137. Tsai Y-H, Chuang L-L, Lee Y-J, Chiu C-J. How 
does diabetes accelerate normal aging? An 
examination of ADL, IADL, and mobility disability 
in middle-aged and older adults with and without 
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;182:109114
138. Streckmann F, Balke M, Cavaletti G, et al. 
Exercise and neuropathy: systematic review with 
meta-analysis. Sports Med 2022;52:1043–1065
139. Jing X, Chen J, Dong Y, et al. Related factors 
of quality of life of type 2 diabetes patients: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Health 
Qual Life Outcomes 2018;16:189
140. Yoon S-J, Kim K-I. Frailty and disability in 
diabetes. Ann Geriatr Med Res 2019;23:165–169
141. World Health Organization. WHO Disability 
Assessment Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0). Accessed 
28 August 2025. Available from https://www 
.who.int/standards/classifications/international- 
classification-of-functioning-disability-and-health/ 
who-disability-assessment-schedule
142. Diabetes Distress Assessment and Resource 
Center. Diabetes Distress Scale (DDS). Accessed 28 
August 2025. Available from https://diabetesdistress 
.org/take-dd-survey/
143. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al. 
Social determinants of health and diabetes: a 
scientific review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
144. Tan T-W, Shih C-D, Concha-Moore KC, et al. 
Correction: disparities in outcomes of patients 
admitted with diabetic foot infections. PLoS One 
2019;14:e0215532
145. Skrepnek GH, Mills JL, Armstrong DG. A 
diabetic emergency one million feet long: disparities 
and burdens of illness among diabetic foot ulcer 
cases within emergency departments in the United 
States, 2006–2010. PLoS One 2015;10:e0134914
146. Lecube A, Hernández C, Genescà J, Simó R. 
Proinflammatory cytokines, insulin resistance, 
and insulin secretion in chronic hepatitis C patients: 
a case-control study. Diabetes Care 2006;29: 
1096–1101
147. Hum J, Jou JH, Green PK, et al. Improvement 
in glycemic control of type 2 diabetes after 
successful treatment of hepatitis C virus. Diabetes 
Care 2017;40:1173–1180
148. Carnovale C, Pozzi M, Dassano A, et al. The 
impact of a successful treatment of hepatitis C 
virus on glyco-metabolic control in diabetic 
patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Acta Diabetol 2019;56:341–354
149. Kouidrat Y, Pizzol D, Cosco T, et al. High 
prevalence of erectile dysfunction in diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of 145 
studies. Diabet Med 2017;34:1185–1192
150. Grover SA, Lowensteyn I, Kaouache M, et 
al. The prevalence of erectile dysfunction in the 
primary care setting: importance of risk factors 
for diabetes and vascular disease. Arch Intern 
Med 2006;166:213–219
151. Allen MS, Walter EE. Erectile dysfunction: 
an umbrella review of meta-analyses of risk- 
factors, treatment, and prevalence outcomes. J 
Sex Med 2019;16:531–541
152. Ma RC-W, So W-Y, Yang X, et al. Erectile 
dysfunction predicts coronary heart disease in 
type 2 diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:2045–2050
153. Gazzaruso C, Solerte SB, Pujia A, et al. 
Erectile dysfunction as a predictor of cardiovascular 
events and death in diabetic patients with 
angiographically proven asymptomatic coronary 
artery disease: a potential protective role for 
statins and 5-phosphodiesterase inhibitors. J 
Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51:2040–2044
154. Kalter-Leibovici O, Wainstein J, Ziv A, et al.; 
Israel Diabetes Research Group (IDRG) Investigators. 
S84 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Clinical, socioeconomic, and lifestyle parameters 
associated with erectile dysfunction among diabetic 
men. Diabetes Care 2005;28:1739–1744
155. De Berardis G, Pellegrini F, Franciosi M, et 
al.; QuED (Quality of Care and Outcomes in 
Type 2 Diabetes) Study Group. Longitudinal 
assessment of quality of life in patients with type 2 
diabetes and self-reported erectile dysfunction. 
Diabetes Care 2005;28:2637–2643
156. Navaneethan SD, Vecchio M, Johnson DW, 
et al. Prevalence and correlates of self-reported 
sexual dysfunction in CKD: a meta-analysis of 
observational studies. Am J Kidney Dis 2010;56: 
670–685
157. Hackett G, Kirby M, Wylie K, et al. British 
Society for Sexual Medicine guidelines on the 
management of erectile dysfunction in men- 
2017. J Sex Med 2018;15:430–457
158. Corona G, Rastrelli G, Morgentaler A, 
Sforza A, Mannucci E, Maggi M. Meta-analysis of 
results of testosterone therapy on sexual function 
based on international index of erectile function 
scores. Eur Urol 2017;72:1000–1011
159. Dhindsa S, Miller MG, McWhirter CL, et al. 
Testosterone concentrations in diabetic and 
nondiabetic obese men. Diabetes Care 2010; 
33:1186–1192
160. Grossmann M. Low testosterone in men 
with type 2 diabetes: significance and treatment. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:2341–2353
161. Bhasin S, Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ, et al.; 
Task Force, Endocrine Society. Testosterone therapy 
in men with androgen deficiency syndromes: an 
Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:2536–2559
162. Bhasin S, Brito JP, Cunningham GR, et al. 
Testosterone therapy in men with hypogonadism: 
an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2018;103:1715–1744
163. Braga MAP, Rivera A, Marinheiro G, et al. 
Long-term cardiovascular safety of testosterone- 
replacement therapy in middle-aged and older 
men: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Am J Cardiovasc Drugs 2025;25:767–777
164. Shindel AW, Lue TF, Anawalt B, et al. 
Medical and Surgical Therapy of Erectile Dysfunction. 
In Endotext. Feingold KR, Anawalt B, Blackman MR, et 
al., Eds. South Dartmouth, MA, MDText.com, 2000. 
Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
pubmed/25905163
165. Lindau ST, Tang H, Gomero A, et al. 
Sexuality among middle-aged and older adults 
with diagnosed and undiagnosed diabetes: a 
national, population-based study. Diabetes Care 
2010;33:2202–2210
166. Shindel AW, Lue TF, Feingold KR. Sexual 
Dysfunction in Diabetes. In Endotext. Feingold 
KR, Anawalt B, Blackman MR, et al., Eds. South 
Dartmouth, MA, MDText.com, 2000. Available 
from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ 
25905326
167. Pontiroli AE, Cortelazzi D, Morabito A. Female 
sexual dysfunction and diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. J Sex Med 2013;10:1044–1051
168. Van Cauwenberghe J, Enzlin P, Nefs G, et al. 
Prevalence of and risk factors for sexual dysfunctions 
in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes: results from 
Diabetes MILES - Flanders. Diabet Med 2022;39: 
e14676
169. Pyrgidis N, Mykoniatis I, Tishukov M, et al. 
Sexual dysfunction in women with end-stage 
renal disease: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. J Sex Med 2021;18:936–945
170. Haugstvedt A, Jørgensen J, Strandberg RB, 
et al. Sexual dysfunction in women with type 1 
diabetes in Norway: a cross-sectional study on 
the prevalence and associations with physical 
and psychosocial complications. Diabet Med 
2022;39:e14704
171. Buskoven MEH, Kjørholt EKH, Strandberg 
RB, Søfteland E, Haugstvedt A. Sexual dysfunction 
in women with type 1 diabetes in Norway: a 
qualitative study of women’s experiences. Diabet 
Med 2022;39:e14856
172. Hendrieckx C, Halliday JA, Russell-Green S, 
et al. Adults with diabetes distress often want to 
talk with their health professionals about it: 
findings from an audit of 4 Australian specialist 
diabetes clinics. Can J Diabetes 2020;44:473–480
173. Di Stasi V, Maseroli E, Vignozzi L. Female 
sexual dysfunction in diabetes: mechanisms, 
diagnosis and treatment. Curr Diabetes Rev 
2022;18:e171121198002
174. Wing RR, Bond DS, Gendrano IN, 3rd, et al.; 
Sexual Dysfunction Subgroup of the Look AHEAD 
Research Group. Effect of intensive lifestyle 
intervention on sexual dysfunction in women 
with type 2 diabetes: results from an ancillary 
Look AHEAD study. Diabetes Care 2013;36:2937–2944
175. Rinella ME, Lazarus JV, Ratziu V, et al.; 
NAFLD Nomenclature Consensus Group. A 
multisociety Delphi consensus statement on new 
fatty liver disease nomenclature. Hepatology 2023; 
78:1966–1986
176. Rinella ME, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Siddiqui 
MS, et al. AASLD practice guidance on the clinical 
assessment and management of nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease. Hepatology 2023;77:1797–1835
177. Lomonaco R, Godinez Leiva E, Bril F, et al. 
Advanced liver fibrosis is common in patients with 
type 2 diabetes followed in the outpatient setting: 
the need for systematic screening. Diabetes Care 
2021;44:399–406
178. Ciardullo S, Monti T, Perseghin G. High 
prevalence of advanced liver fibrosis assessed by 
transient elastography among U.S. adults with 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:519–525
179. Barb D, Repetto EM, Stokes ME, Shankar 
SS, Cusi K. Type 2 diabetes mellitus increases the 
risk of hepatic fibrosis in individuals with obesity 
and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Obesity 
(Silver Spring) 2021;29:1950–1960
180. Younossi ZM, Golabi P, Price JK, et al. The 
global epidemiology of nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis among 
patients with type 2 diabetes. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2024;22:1999–2010
181. Stefan N, Cusi K. A global view of the 
interplay between non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
and diabetes. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2022;10: 
284–296
182. Harrison SA, Gawrieh S, Roberts K, et al. 
Prospective evaluation of the prevalence of non- 
alcoholic fatty liver disease and steatohepatitis in 
a large middle-aged US cohort. J Hepatol 2021; 
75:284–291
183. Castera L, Laouenan C, Vallet-Pichard A, 
et al.; QUID-NASH investigators. High prevalence 
of NASH and advanced fibrosis in type 2 
diabetes: a prospective study of 330 outpatients 
undergoing liver biopsies for elevated ALT, 
using a low threshold. Diabetes Care 2023;46: 
1354–1362
184. Paik JM, Golabi P, Younossi Y, Mishra A, 
Younossi ZM. Changes in the global burden of 
chronic liver diseases from 2012 to 2017: the 
growing impact of NAFLD. Hepatology 2020;72: 
1605–1616
185. Simon TG, Roelstraete B, Khalili H, Hagström 
H, Ludvigsson JF. Mortality in biopsy-confirmed 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: results from a 
nationwide cohort. Gut 2021;70:1375–1382
186. Burra P, Becchetti C, Germani G. NAFLD 
and liver transplantation: disease burden, current 
management and future challenges. JHEP Rep 
2020;2:100192
187. Corbin KD, Driscoll KA, Pratley RE, Smith 
SR, Maahs DM, Mayer-Davis EJ; Advancing Care 
for Type 1 Diabetes and Obesity Network (ACT1ON). 
Obesity in type 1 diabetes: pathophysiology, clinical 
impact, and mechanisms. Endocr Rev 2018;39: 
629–663
188. de Vries M, Westerink J, Kaasjager KHAH, 
de Valk HW. Prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) in patients with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020;105:3842–3853
189. Cusi K, Sanyal AJ, Zhang S, et al. Non- 
alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) prevalence 
and its metabolic associations in patients with 
type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 
Obes Metab 2017;19:1630–1634
190. Ciardullo S, Perseghin G. Prevalence of 
elevated liver stiffness in patients with type 1 and 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2022;190:109981
191. Younossi ZM, Ong JP, Takahashi H, et al.; 
Global Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Council. A 
global survey of physicians knowledge about 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2022;20:e1456–e1468
192. Kanwal F, Shubrook JH, Younossi Z, et al. 
Preparing for the NASH epidemic: a call to action. 
Diabetes Care 2021;44:2162–2172
193. Angulo P, Kleiner DE, Dam-Larsen S, et al. 
Liver fibrosis, but no other histologic features, is 
associated with long-term outcomes of patients 
with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 
2015;149:389–397
194. Ekstedt M, Hagström H, Nasr P, et al. 
Fibrosis stage is the strongest predictor for 
disease-specific mortality in NAFLD after up to 
33 years of follow-up. Hepatology 2015;61: 
1547–1554
195. Taylor RS, Taylor RJ, Bayliss S, et al. 
Association between fibrosis stage and outcomes 
of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Gastroenterology 
2020;158:1611–1625
196. Sanyal AJ, Van Natta ML, Clark J, et al.; 
NASH Clinical Research Network (CRN). Prospective 
study of outcomes in adults with nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease. N Engl J Med 2021;385:1559–1569
197. Kanwal F, Shubrook JH, Adams LA, et al. 
Clinical care pathway for the risk stratification 
and management of patients with nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 2021;161: 
1657–1669
198. Gellert-Kristensen H, Richardson TG, Davey 
Smith G, Nordestgaard BG, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, 
Stender S. Combined effect of PNPLA3, TM6SF2, 
and HSD17B13 variants on risk of cirrhosis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma in the general population. 
Hepatology 2020;72:845–856
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S85 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
199. Stender S, Kozlitina J, Nordestgaard BG, 
Tybjærg-Hansen A, Hobbs HH, Cohen JC. 
Adiposity amplifies the genetic risk of fatty liver 
disease conferred by multiple loci. Nat Genet 
2017;49:842–847
200. Duell PB, Welty FK, Miller M, et al.; American 
Heart Association Council on Arteriosclerosis, 
Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council on 
Hypertension; Council on the Kidney in Cardiovascular 
Disease; Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic 
Health; and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. 
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and cardiovascular risk: 
a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2022; 
42:e168–e185
201. Mantovani A, Csermely A, Petracca G, et al. 
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and risk of fatal 
and non-fatal cardiovascular events: an updated 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;6:903–913
202. Ciardullo S, Ballabeni C, Trevisan R, Perseghin 
G. Liver stiffness, albuminuria and chronic kidney 
disease in patients with NAFLD: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Biomolecules 2022; 
12:105
203. Musso G, Gambino R, Tabibian JH, et al. 
Association of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 2014;11:e1001680
204. Song D, Li C, Wang Z, Zhao Y, Shen B, Zhao 
W. Association of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
with diabetic retinopathy in type 2 diabetic 
patients: a meta-analysis of observational studies. 
J Diabetes Investig 2021;12:1471–1479
205. Cusi K, Isaacs S, Barb D, et al. American 
Association of Clinical Endocrinology Clinical practice 
guideline for the diagnosis and management of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in primary care and 
endocrinology clinical settings: co-sponsored by the 
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases 
(AASLD). Endocr Pract 2022;28:528–562
206. Cusi K, Abdelmalek MF, Apovian CM, et al. 
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver 
disease (MASLD) in people with diabetes: the 
need for screening and early intervention. A 
consensus report of the American Diabetes 
Association. Diabetes Care 2025;48:1057–1082
207. Eslam M, Sarin SK, Wong VW-S, et al. The 
Asian Pacific Association for the Study of the 
Liver clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis 
and management of metabolic associated fatty 
liver disease. Hepatol Int 2020;14:889–919
208. European Association for the Study of the 
Liver (EASL); European Association for the Study 
of Diabetes (EASD); European Association for the 
Study of Obesity (EASO). EASL-EASD-EASO clinical 
practice guidelines on the management of 
metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver 
disease (MASLD). J Hepatol 2024;81:492–542
209. Portillo-Sanchez P, Bril F, Maximos M, et al. 
High prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and 
normal plasma aminotransferase levels. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2015;100:2231–2238
210. Maximos M, Bril F, Portillo Sanchez P, et al. 
The role of liver fat and insulin resistance as 
determinants of plasma aminotransferase elevation 
in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology 
2015;61:153–160
211. Kwo PY, Cohen SM, Lim JK. ACG clinical 
guideline: evaluation of abnormal liver chemistries. 
Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:18–35
212. Younossi ZM, Anstee QM, Wai-Sun Wong V, 
et al. The association of histologic and noninvasive 
tests with adverse clinical and patient-reported 
outcomes in patients with advanced fibrosis due 
to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Gastroenterology 
2021;160:1608–1619
213. Siddiqui MS, Yamada G, Vuppalanchi R, et 
al.; NASH Clinical Research Network. Diagnostic 
accuracy of noninvasive fibrosis models to detect 
change in fibrosis stage. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2019;17:1877–1885
214. Unalp-Arida A, Ruhl CE. Liver fibrosis scores 
predict liver disease mortality in the United 
States population. Hepatology 2017;66:84–95
215. Qadri S, Ahlholm N, Lønsmann I, et al. 
Obesity modifies the performance of fibrosis 
biomarkers in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:e2008–e2020
216. Bril F, McPhaul MJ, Caulfield MP, et al. 
Performance of plasma biomarkers and diagnostic 
panels for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and 
advanced fibrosis in patients with type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2020;43:290–297
217. McPherson S, Hardy T, Dufour J-F, et al. Age 
as a confounding factor for the accurate non- 
invasive diagnosis of advanced NAFLD fibrosis. 
Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112:740–751
218. Castera L, Friedrich-Rust M, Loomba R. 
Noninvasive assessment of liver disease in patients 
with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 
2019;156:1264–1281
219. Eddowes PJ, Sasso M, Allison M, et al. 
Accuracy of FibroScan controlled attenuation 
parameter and liver stiffness measurement in 
assessing steatosis and fibrosis in patients with 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology 
2019;156:1717–1730
220. Mózes FE, Lee JA, Selvaraj EA, et al.; LITMUS 
Investigators. Diagnostic accuracy of non-invasive 
tests for advanced fibrosis in patients with NAFLD: 
an individual patient data meta-analysis. Gut 
2022;71:1006–1019
221. Elhence A, Anand A, Biswas S, et al. 
Compensated advanced chronic liver disease in 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: two-step strategy 
is better than Baveno criteria. Dig Dis Sci 2023; 
68:1016–1025
222. Wong VWS, Zelber-Sagi S, Cusi K, et al. 
Management of NAFLD in primary care settings. 
Liver Int 2022;42:2377–2389
223. Lazarus JV, Anstee QM, Hagström H, et al. 
Defining comprehensive models of care for NAFLD. 
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;18:717–729
224. Cusi K, Budd J, Johnson E, Shubrook J. 
Making sense of the nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease clinical practice guidelines: what clinicians 
need to know. Diabetes Spectr 2024;37:29–38
225. Anstee QM, Lawitz EJ, Alkhouri N, et al. 
Noninvasive tests accurately identify advanced 
fibrosis due to NASH: baseline data from the 
STELLAR trials. Hepatology 2019;70:1521–1530
226. Lee J, Vali Y, Boursier J, et al. Prognostic 
accuracy of FIB-4, NAFLD fibrosis score and APRI 
for NAFLD-related events: a systematic review. 
Liver Int 2021;41:261–270
227. Chan W-K, Treeprasertsuk S, Goh GB-B, et 
al. Optimizing use of nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease fibrosis score, fibrosis-4 score, and liver 
stiffness measurement to identify patients with 
advanced fibrosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2019;17:2570–2580
228. Petta S, Wai-Sun Wong V, Bugianesi E, et al. 
Impact of obesity and alanine aminotransferase 
levels on the diagnostic accuracy for advanced 
liver fibrosis of noninvasive tools in patients with 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Am J Gastroenterol 
2019;114:916–928
229. Vali Y, Lee J, Boursier J, et al.; LITMUS 
systematic review team. Enhanced liver fibrosis 
test for the non-invasive diagnosis of fibrosis in 
patients with NAFLD: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Hepatol 2020;73:252–262
230. Srivastava A, Gailer R, Tanwar S, et al. 
Prospective evaluation of a primary care referral 
pathway for patients with non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease. J Hepatol 2019;71:371–378
231. Saarinen K, Färkkilä M, Jula A, et al. 
Enhanced liver fibrosis test predicts liver-related 
outcomes in the general population. JHEP Rep 
2023;5:100765
232. Kjaergaard M, Lindvig KP, Thorhauge KH, et 
al. Using the ELF test, FIB-4 and NAFLD fibrosis 
score to screen the population for liver disease. J 
Hepatol 2023;79:277–286
233. Zoncapè M, Liguori A, Tsochatzis EA. Non- 
invasive testing and risk-stratification in patients 
with MASLD. Eur J Intern Med 2024;122:11–19
234. Andersson A, Kelly M, Imajo K, et al. Clinical 
utility of magnetic resonance imaging biomarkers 
for identifying nonalcoholic steatohepatitis patients 
at high risk of progression: a multicenter pooled data 
and meta-analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2022; 
20:2451–2461
235. Long MT, Noureddin M, Lim JK. AGA clinical 
practice update: diagnosis and management of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in lean individuals: 
expert review. Gastroenterology 2022;163:764–774
236. Cusi K. Role of obesity and lipotoxicity in 
the development of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: 
pathophysiology and clinical implications. Gastro- 
enterology 2012;142:711–725
237. Loomba R, Friedman SL, Shulman GI. 
Mechanisms and disease consequences of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Cell 2021;184: 
2537–2564
238. Schuppan D, Surabattula R, Wang XY. 
Determinants of fibrosis progression and regres- 
sion in NASH. J Hepatol 2018;68:238–250
239. Promrat K, Kleiner DE, Niemeier HM, et al. 
Randomized controlled trial testing the effects of 
weight loss on nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepato- 
logy 2010;51:121–129
240. Vilar-Gomez E, Martinez-Perez Y, Calzadilla- 
Bertot L, et al. Weight loss through lifestyle 
modification significantly reduces features of 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Gastroenterology 2015; 
149:367–378
241. Younossi ZM, Zelber-Sagi S, Henry L, Gerber 
LH. Lifestyle interventions in nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2023;20:708–722
242. Arab JP, Dirchwolf M, Alvares-da-Silva MR, 
et al. Latin American Association for the Study of 
the Liver (ALEH) practice guidance for the 
diagnosis and treatment of non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease. Ann Hepatol 2020;19:674–690
243. Sargeant JA, Gray LJ, Bodicoat DH, et al. 
The effect of exercise training on intrahepatic 
triglyceride and hepatic insulin sensitivity: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev 
2018;19:1446–1459
244. Kanwal F, Kramer JR, Li L, et al. Effect of 
metabolic traits on the risk of cirrhosis and 
S86 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
hepatocellular cancer in nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Hepatology 2020;71:808–819
245. Younossi Z, Stepanova M, Sanyal AJ, et al. 
The conundrum of cryptogenic cirrhosis: adverse 
outcomes without treatment options. J Hepatol 
2018;69:1365–1370
246. Castera L, Cusi K. Diabetes and cirrhosis: 
current concepts on diagnosis and management. 
Hepatology 2023;77:2128–2146
247. Patel Chavez C, Cusi K, Kadiyala S. The 
emerging role of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor 
agonists for the management of NAFLD. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:29–38
248. Gastaldelli A, Cusi K. From NASH to diabetes 
and from diabetes to NASH: mechanisms and 
treatment options. JHEP Rep 2019;1:312–328
249. Budd J, Cusi K. Role of agents for the 
treatment of diabetes in the management of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Curr Diab Rep 
2020;20:59
250. Gonzalez-Rellan MJ, Drucker DJ. The 
expanding benefits of GLP-1 medicines. Cell Rep 
Med 2025;6:102214
251. Musso G, Cassader M, Paschetta E, Gambino 
R. Thiazolidinediones and Advanced Liver Fibrosis in 
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis: a Meta-analysis. JAMA 
Intern Med 2017;177:633–640
252. Bril F, Kalavalapalli S, Clark VC, et al. Response 
to pioglitazone in patients with nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis with vs without type 2 diabetes. 
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;16:558–566
253. Sanyal AJ, Newsome PN, Kliers I, et al.; 
ESSENCE Study Group. Phase 3 trial of semaglutide 
in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis. 
N Engl J Med 2025;392:2089–2099
254. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA 
Approves Treatment for Serious Liver Disease 
Known as ‘MASH’. Accessed 28 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.fda.gov/drugs/news- 
events-human-drugs/fda-approves-treatment 
-serious-liver-disease-known-mash
255. Belfort R, Harrison SA, Brown K, et al. A 
placebo-controlled trial of pioglitazone in subjects 
with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 
2006;355:2297–2307
256. Huang J-F, Dai C-Y, Huang C-F, et al. First-in- 
Asian double-blind randomized trial to assess the 
efficacy and safety of insulin sensitizer in nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis patients. Hepatol Int 2021;15: 
1136–1147
257. Cusi K, Orsak B, Bril F, et al. Long-term 
pioglitazone treatment for patients with nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis and prediabetes or type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2016; 
165:305–315
258. Sanyal AJ, Chalasani N, Kowdley KV, et al.; 
NASH CRN. Pioglitazone, vitamin E, or placebo for 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 2010; 
362:1675–1685
259. Aithal GP, Thomas JA, Kaye PV, et al. 
Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of pioglitazone in 
nondiabetic subjects with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. 
Gastroenterology 2008;135:1176–1184
260. Sathyanarayana P, Jogi M, Muthupillai R, 
Krishnamurthy R, Samson SL, Bajaj M. Effects of 
combined exenatide and pioglitazone therapy on 
hepatic fat content in type 2 diabetes. Obesity 
(Silver Spring) 2011;19:2310–2315
261. Abdul-Ghani M, Migahid O, Megahed A, 
DeFronzo RA, Al-Ozairi E, Jayyousi A. Combination 
therapy with pioglitazone/exenatide improves beta- 
cell function and produces superior glycaemic 
control compared with basal/bolus insulin in poorly 
controlled type 2 diabetes: a 3-year follow-up of 
the Qatar study. Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22: 
2287–2294
262. Lavynenko O, Abdul-Ghani M, Alatrach M, 
et al. Combination therapy with pioglitazone/ 
exenatide/metformin reduces the prevalence of 
hepatic fibrosis and steatosis: the efficacy and 
durability of initial combination therapy for type 2 
diabetes (EDICT). Diabetes Obes Metab 2022; 
24:899–907
263. Ahrén B, Masmiquel L, Kumar H, et al. Efficacy 
and safety of once-weekly semaglutide versus 
once-daily sitagliptin as an add-on to metformin, 
thiazolidinediones, or both, in patients with type 2 
diabetes (SUSTAIN 2): a 56-week, double-blind, 
phase 3a, randomised trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 
2017;5:341–354
264. Noureddin M, Jones C, Alkhouri N, Gomez 
EV, Dieterich DT, Rinella ME; NASHNET. Screening 
for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in persons 
with type 2 diabetes in the United States is cost- 
effective: a comprehensive cost-utility analysis. 
Gastroenterology 2020;159:1985–1987
265. Mahady SE, Wong G, Craig JC, George J. 
Pioglitazone and vitamin E for nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis: a cost utility analysis. Hepatology 
2012;56:2172–2179
266. Kovacs CS, Seshiah V, Swallow R, et al.; 
EMPA-REG PIO trial investigators. Empagliflozin 
improves glycaemic and weight control as add-on 
therapy to pioglitazone or pioglitazone plus 
metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 
24-week, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2014;16:147–158
267. Armstrong MJ, Gaunt P, Aithal GP, et al.; 
LEAN trial team. Liraglutide safety and efficacy in 
patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (LEAN): 
a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo- 
controlled phase 2 study. Lancet 2016;387:679–690
268. Gastaldelli A, Cusi K, Fernández Landó L, 
Bray R, Brouwers B, Rodríguez A. Effect of 
tirzepatide versus insulin degludec on liver fat 
content and abdominal adipose tissue in people 
with type 2 diabetes (SURPASS-3 MRI): a substudy 
of the randomised, open-label, parallel-group, 
phase 3 SURPASS-3 trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 
2022;10:393–406
269. Loomba R, Hartman ML, Lawitz EJ, et al.; 
SYNERGY-NASH Investigators. Tirzepatide for 
metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis 
with liver fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2024;391:299–310
270. Sanyal AJ, Bedossa P, Fraessdorf M, et al.; 
1404-0043 Trial Investigators. A phase 2 randomized 
trial of survodutide in MASH and fibrosis. N Engl J 
Med 2024;391:311–319
271. Cusi K, Bril F, Barb D, et al. Effect of 
canagliflozin treatment on hepatic triglyceride 
content and glucose metabolism in patients with 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2019;21: 
812–821
272. Kahl S, Gancheva S, Straßburger K, et al. 
Empagliflozin effectively lowers liver fat content 
in well-controlled type 2 diabetes: a randomized, 
double-blind, phase 4, placebo-controlled trial. 
Diabetes Care 2020;43:298–305
273. Latva-Rasku A, Honka M-J, Kullberg J, et al. 
The SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin reduces liver fat 
but does not affect tissue insulin sensitivity: a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study 
with 8-week treatment in type 2 diabetes patients. 
Diabetes Care 2019;42:931–937
274. Harrison SA, Bedossa P, Guy CD, et al.; 
MAESTRO-NASH Investigators. A phase 3, randomized, 
controlled trial of resmetirom in NASH with liver 
fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2024;390:497–509
275. Cusi K. Selective agonists of thyroid hormone 
receptor beta for the treatment of NASH. N Engl J 
Med 2024;390:559–561
276. Chen VL, Morgan TR, Rotman Y, et al. 
Resmetirom therapy for metabolic dysfunction- 
associated steatotic liver disease: October 2024 
updates to AASLD Practice Guidance [published 
correction appears in Hepatology 2025;81:E133]. 
Hepatology 2025;81:312–320
277. Loomba R, Abdelmalek MF, Armstrong MJ, 
et al.; NN9931-4492 investigators. Semaglutide 
2·4 mg once weekly in patients with non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis-related cirrhosis: a randomised, 
placebo-controlled phase 2 trial. Lancet Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2023;8:511–522
278. Aminian A, Al-Kurd A, Wilson R, et al. 
Association of bariatric surgery with major 
adverse liver and cardiovascular outcomes in 
patients with biopsy-proven nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. 
JAMA 2021;326:2031–2042
279. Fakhry TK, Mhaskar R, Schwitalla T, Muradova 
E, Gonzalvo JP, Murr MM. Bariatric surgery improves 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a contemporary 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Surg Obes 
Relat Dis 2019;15:502–511
280. Ramai D, Singh J, Lester J, et al. Systematic 
review with meta-analysis: bariatric surgery reduces 
the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther 2021;53:977–984
281. Choi J, Nguyen VH, Przybyszewski E, et al. 
Statin use and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma 
and liver fibrosis in chronic liver disease. JAMA 
Intern Med 2025;185:522–530
282. Kaplan DE, Serper MA, Mehta R, et al.; 
VOCAL Study Group. Effects of hypercholesterolemia 
and statin exposure on survival in a large national 
cohort of patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 
2019;156:1693–1706
283. Li C, Ford ES, Zhao G, Croft JB, Balluz LS, 
Mokdad AH. Prevalence of self-reported clinically 
diagnosed sleep apnea according to obesity 
status in men and women: national Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey, 2005–2006. Prev 
Med 2010;51:18–23
284. West SD, Nicoll DJ, Stradling JR. Prevalence 
of obstructive sleep apnoea in men with type 2 
diabetes. Thorax 2006;61:945–950
285. Resnick HE, Redline S, Shahar E, et al.; 
Sleep Heart Health Study. Diabetes and sleep 
disturbances: findings from the Sleep Heart 
Health Study. Diabetes Care 2003;26:702–709
286. Foster GD, Sanders MH, Millman R, et al.; 
Sleep AHEAD Research Group. Obstructive sleep 
apnea among obese patients with type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2009;32:1017–1019
287. Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, Curry 
SJ, et al.; US Preventive Services Task Force. 
Screening for obstructive sleep apnea in adults: 
US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation 
statement. JAMA 2017;317:407–414
288. Malhotra A, Grunstein RR, Fietze I, et al.; 
SURMOUNT-OSA Investigators. Tirzepatide for 
the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea and 
obesity. N Engl J Med 2024;391:1193–1205
289. Piciucchi M, Capurso G, Archibugi L, Delle 
Fave MM, Capasso M, Delle Fave G. Exocrine 
pancreatic insufficiency in diabetic patients: 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities
S87 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
prevalence, mechanisms, and treatment. Int J 
Endocrinol 2015;2015:595649
290. Lee Y-K, Huang M-Y, Hsu C-Y, Su Y-C. 
Bidirectional relationship between diabetes and 
acute pancreatitis: a population-based cohort study 
in Taiwan. Medicine (Baltimore) 2016;95:e2448
291. Das SLM, Singh PP, Phillips ARJ, Murphy R, 
Windsor JA, Petrov MS. Newly diagnosed diabetes 
mellitus after acute pancreatitis: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Gut 2014;63:818–831
292. Petrov MS. Diabetes of the exocrine pancreas: 
American Diabetes Association-compliant lexicon. 
Pancreatology 2017;17:523–526
293. Thomsen RW, Pedersen L, Møller N, Kahlert 
J, Beck-Nielsen H, Sørensen HT. Incretin-based 
therapy and risk of acute pancreatitis: a nationwide 
population-based case-control study. Diabetes Care 
2015;38:1089–1098
294. Tkác I, Raz I. Combined analysis of three 
large interventional trials with gliptins indicates 
increased incidence of acute pancreatitis in 
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 
2017;40:284–286
295. Sutherland DER, Radosevich DM, Bellin 
MD, et al. Total pancreatectomy and islet 
autotransplantation for chronic pancreatitis. J 
Am Coll Surg 2012;214:409–424
296. Quartuccio M, Hall E, Singh V, et al. 
Glycemic predictors of insulin independence after 
total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2017;102:801–809
297. Webb MA, Illouz SC, Pollard CA, et al. Islet 
auto transplantation following total pancreatectomy: 
a long-term assessment of graft function. Pancreas 
2008;37:282–287
298. Wu Q, Zhang M, Qin Y, et al. Systematic 
review and meta-analysis of islet autotransplantation 
after total pancreatectomy in chronic pancreatitis 
patients. Endocr J 2015;62:227–234
299. Baiduc RR, Helzner EP. Epidemiology of diabetes 
and hearing loss. Semin Hear 2019;40:281–291
300. Helzner EP, Contrera KJ. Type 2 diabetes 
and hearing impairment. Curr Diab Rep 2016;16:3
301. Hicks CW, Wang D, Lin FR, Reed N, 
Windham BG, Selvin E. Peripheral neuropathy 
and vision and hearing impairment in US adults 
with and without diabetes. Am J Epidemiol 
2023;192:237–245
302. Bainbridge KE, Hoffman HJ, Cowie CC. Risk 
factors for hearing impairment among U.S. adults 
with diabetes: National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey 1999–2004. Diabetes Care 
2011;34:1540–1545
303. Schade DS, Lorenzi GM, Braffett BH, et al.; 
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Hearing impairment 
and type 1 diabetes in the Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes 
Interventions and Complications (DCCT/EDIC) 
cohort. Diabetes Care 2018;41:2495–2501
304. Rasmussen VF, Vestergaard ET, Hejlesen O, 
Andersson CUN, Cichosz SL. Prevalence of taste 
and smell impairment in adults with diabetes: a 
cross-sectional analysis of data from the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). 
Prim Care Diabetes 2018;12:453–459
305. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Interim Clinical Considerations for Use of COVID-19 
Vaccines in the United States. Accessed 19 
September 2025. Available from https://www.cdc 
.gov/vaccines/covid-19/clinical-considerations/ 
covid-19-vaccines-us.html
306. Sandul AL, Rapposelli K, Nyendak M, Kim 
M. Updated recommendation for universal hepatitis 
b vaccination in adults aged 19–59 years - United 
States, 2024. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2024;73:1106
307. Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al. 
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 
2022. A consensus report by the American 
Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). 
Diabetes Care 2022;45:2753–2786
S88 
Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment of Comorbidities                          
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S61/848865/dc26s004.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
