Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026
S89 
5. FACILITATING POSITIVE HEALTH BEHAVIORS
5. Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to
Improve Health Outcomes:
Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2026
Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S89–S131 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S005
American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee for
Diabetes*
*A complete list of members of the American 
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee 
for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/10 
.2337/dc26-SINT. 
Duality of interest information for each contributor 
is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS. 
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 5. 
Facilitating positive health behaviors and well-
being to improve health outcomes: Standards of 
Care in Diabetes—2026. Diabetes Care 2026;49 
(Suppl. 1):S89–S131 
© 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. 
Readers may use this work for educational, 
noncommercial purposes if properly cited and 
unaltered. The version of record may be linked 
at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA 
permission is required to post this work on any 
third-party site or platform. This publication and its 
contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or 
used for text or data mining, machine learning, 
or similar technologies without prior written 
permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute 
this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes
.org. More information is available at https://
diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes the 
ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the compo-
nents of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to evaluate 
quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes, an 
interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care 
annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, 
statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical prac-
tice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, 
please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the 
Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC. 
Building positive health behaviors and maintaining psychological well-being are foun-
dational for achieving diabetes management goals and maximizing quality of life (1,2). 
Essential to achieving these goals are diabetes self-management education and sup-
port (DSMES), medical nutrition therapy (MNT), routine physical activity, adequate
quality sleep, support for cessation of tobacco products and vaping, health behavior
counseling, and psychosocial care. Following an initial comprehensive health
evaluation (see section 4, “Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and Assessment
of Comorbidities”), health care professionals should engage in person-centered col-
laborative care with people with diabetes (3–7). Person-centered collaborative care
is guided by shared decision-making in treatment plan selection; facilitating access to 
medical, behavioral, psychosocial, educational, and technological resources and sup-
port; and shared monitoring of agreed-upon diabetes care plans and behavioral goals 
(8,9). Routine care evaluations should include assessments of medical and behavioral 
health outcomes, particularly during periods of changes in health and well-being.
DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION AND SUPPORT 
Recommendations 
5.1 Advise all people with diabetes to participate in developmentally and cul-
turally appropriate diabetes self-management education and support (DSMES)
to facilitate informed decision-making, self-care behaviors, problem-solving, and
active collaboration with the health care team. A
5.2 Provide DSMES at diagnosis, annually and/or when not meeting treatment
goals, when complicating factors develop (e.g., medical, functional, and psychoso-
cial), and when transitions in life and care occur. E
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S90 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
The overall objectives of DSMES are to 
support informed decision-making, self-
care behaviors, problem-solving, and ac-
tive collaboration with the health care 
team to improve clinical outcomes, health 
status, and well-being in a cost-effective 
manner (2). DSMES facilitates the knowl-
edge, decision-making, and skills mastery 
necessary for optimal diabetes self-care 
and incorporates the needs, goals, and 
life experiences of the person with diabe-
tes (10). When providing DSMES, health 
care professionals should consider a per-
son’s burden of treatment, level of self-
efﬁcacy for self-care behaviors, and de-
gree of social and family support. En-
gagement in self-management behaviors 
and subsequent clinical outcomes, health 
status, and quality of life, in addition to 
psychosocial factors affecting the per-
son’s ability to self-manage, should be 
monitored on an individualized timeframe 
(e.g., the four critical times listed in Rec-
ommendation 5.2). A randomized con-
trolled trial (RCT) that evaluated a 
decision-making education and skill-
building program (11) improved health 
outcomes and quality of care (12). 
Using judgmental words is associated 
with increased feelings of shame and 
guilt; therefore, health care professionals 
should consider the impact language has 
on building therapeutic and productive rela-
tionships. Health care professionals should 
use positive, strengths-based words and 
phrases that put people ﬁrst (13). See sec-
tion 4, “Comprehensive Medical Evaluation 
and Assessment of Comorbidities,” for 
more on use of language. 
In accordance with the “2022 National 
Standards for Diabetes Self-Management 
Education and Support” (here referred 
to as the National Standards for DSMES) 
(10), all people with diabetes should partici-
pate in developmentally appropriate and 
culturally sensitive DSMES, as it helps people 
with diabetes identify and implement effec-
tive self-management strategies and coping 
skills (2). DSMES includes collaborative goal 
setting that improves empowerment, 
self-management, and quality of life as 
the person with diabetes encounters new 
challenges and as advances in treatment 
become available (14–16). Moreover, 
DSMES should be thought of as an ongo-
ing process—not a one-time occurrence. 
The National Standards for DSMES (10) 
include delivery of content addressing: 
• Pathophysiology of diabetes and treat-
ment options 
• Healthy coping 
• Healthy eating 
• Being active 
• Taking medication 
• Monitoring 
• Reducing risk (treating acute and chronic 
complications) 
• Problem-solving and behavior change 
strategies 
In addition to providing DSMES upon 
diagnosis, there are additional critical time 
points when the need for DSMES should 
be evaluated by the health care profes-
sional and/or interprofessional team, with 
referrals made as needed (2): 
• Annually and/or when not meeting 
treatment goals, whichever is more 
frequent 
• When complicating factors (e.g., health 
conditions, physical or functional limita-
tions, emotional factors, and basic living 
needs) that inﬂuence self-management 
develop 
• When transitions in life and care occur 
DSMES empowers individuals with di-
abetes and their families by providing tools 
to make informed self-management deci-
sions (10,13). DSMES should be person-
centered—placing the person with diabetes 
and their family and/or support system at 
the center of the care model as they work 
in collaboration with health care profes-
sionals. Person-centered care is respectful 
of and responsive to individual and cul-
tural preferences, needs, and values and 
ensures the personal values of those living 
with diabetes guide decision-making (17). 
5.3 Assess clinical outcomes, health 
status, and well-being as key goals of 
DSMES on an individualized timeframe. C 
5.4 Use behavioral strategies (e.g., 
motivational interviewing, goal setting, 
problem-solving) to support DSMES 
and engagement in behaviors known 
to optimize health-related quality of 
life and outcomes. A 
5.5 Provide culturally and socially 
appropriate DSMES responsive to 
personal preferences and needs in 
group or individual settings. A Com-
municate DSMES participation with 
the diabetes care team. E 
5.6 Offer DSMES via telehealth and/or 
digital interventions to meet individ-
ual preferences, reduce access barriers, 
and improve satisfaction. B 
5.7 DSMES can improve outcomes and 
reduce costs, so reimbursement by 
third-party payors is recommended. B 
5.8 Identify and address barriers to 
DSMES that exist at the payor, health 
system, clinic, health care professional, 
and individual levels. E 
5.9 Assess the social determinants of 
health to guide and design delivery 
of DSMES to maximize health equity 
across populations. C 
Evidence for the Benefits 
DSMES is associated with improved dia-
betes knowledge and self-care behaviors 
(18,19), lower A1C (19–22), lower self-
reported weight (23), improved quality of 
life (24,25), reduced all-cause mortality risk 
(26), positive coping behaviors (6,27), and 
lower health care costs (28–30). DSMES 
is also associated with an increased use 
of primary care and preventive services 
(28,31) and less frequent use of acute care 
and inpatient hospital services (23). People 
with diabetes who participate in DSMES 
are more likely to follow best practice treat-
ment recommendations, particularly those 
with Medicare, and have lower Medicare 
and insurance claim costs (31,32). DSMES 
interventions have better outcomes when 
they are >10 h over the course of 6–12 
months (20) and provide ongoing culturally 
(31,33,34) and age-appropriate (35,36) 
support (14,15,37). Additionally, DSMES is 
also more effective when it is tailored to in-
dividual needs and preferences, addresses 
psychosocial issues, and incorporates be-
havioral strategies (13,27,38,39). Individual 
and group approaches are effective (23,40), 
with a slight beneﬁt realized  by  those  who  
engage in both (20). 
Strong evidence now exists for the 
beneﬁts of telehealth, telemedicine, and 
telephone-based or internet-based (i.e., 
virtual) DSMES for diabetes prevention 
and management in a wide variety of 
populations and age-groups (10,41–43). 
When feasible, the best choice for deliv-
ery of DSMES is whatever approach aligns 
best with individual preferences. A 2023 
systematic review and meta-analysis of 
RCTs reported moderate evidence indicat-
ing digital health technologies (e.g., mo-
bile apps, websites, digital coaching, and 
SMS [i.e., texting]) can be effective modes 
of intervention delivery for DSMES. In fact, 
telehealth-based interventions have been 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S91 
found to produce a greater reduction in 
A1C (−0.30 percentage points; 95% CI 
−0.42 to −0.19) compared with control 
(42). Importantly, these digital methods 
provide outcomes that are comparable 
with or even better than those seen with 
traditional in-person care (42). Greater A1C 
reductions are demonstrated with increased 
virtual engagement, although data from 
trials are heterogeneous. 
Diabetes care and education specialists 
(DCES) are effective providers of DSMES. 
Members of the DSMES team can include 
a variety of health care professionals such 
as nurses (registered nurses and nurse 
practitioners), registered dietitian nutri-
tionists (RDNs), pharmacists, social work-
ers, certiﬁed health education specialists, 
exercise physiologists, psychologists and 
behavioral health professionals, commu-
nity health workers, care coordinators or 
navigators, and others who can tailor cur-
ricula to individual needs (44–46). Team 
members acting in a DCES capacity should 
have specialized clinical knowledge of di-
abetes and behavior change principles. In 
addition, a DCES needs to be knowledge-
able about technology-enabled services 
and can serve as a technology champion 
within their practice (47). Credentials such 
as certiﬁed DCES (cbdce.org/) and/or board 
certiﬁcation in advanced diabetes man-
agement (BC-ADM) (diabeteseducator.org/ 
education/certiﬁcation/bc_adm) demon-
strates an individual’s specialized training 
and expertise in diabetes management, ed-
ucation, and support (10), and engagement 
with qualiﬁed professionals has been shown 
to improve diabetes-related outcomes 
(48). There is also continued and growing 
evidence for the role of community health 
workers, peer educators, peer support, 
and lay leaders in providing ongoing diabe-
tes self-management support (49,50). In 
locations where there are no DCES serv-
ices available, other members of the dia-
betes care team can provide some aspects 
of DSMES; however, billing restrictions need 
to be considered (51). 
Social determinants of health (SDOH) 
are an important aspect of diabetes care 
and should be a ssessed and  weighed in  
guiding the design and delivery of DSMES. 
The DSMES team needs to consider char-
acteristics such as racial identity, ethnic 
and cultural background, biological sex 
and gender identity, age, geographic loca-
tion, technology access, education, literacy, 
and numeracy (13). Barriers to equitable 
DSMES access can be mitigated by 
assessing the impact of the individual’s 
SDOH and leveraging creative delivery op-
tions (e.g., telehealth and online) that will 
work best for the population in need of 
DSMES (10). For example, a systematic re-
view and meta-analysis of telehealth 
DSMES interventions with Black and His-
panic adults with diabetes showed a 
0.465% decrease in A1C, demonstrating 
the importance of considering demo-
graphic factors in relation to DSMES inter-
ventions (43). 
Despite the recognized beneﬁts of 
DSMES, fewer than 10% of individuals re-
ferred for DSMES through their health in-
surance or Medicare receive it, while 
about half the participants in an analysis 
of Behavioral Risk Factors Surveillance 
System (BRFSS) data report getting diabe-
tes education (22,52). Barriers to DSMES 
exist at multiple levels, including the health 
system, payor, clinic, health care pro-
fessional, and individual, for a myriad of 
reasons from lack of administrative leader-
ship support to ineffective DSMES referral 
processes and transportation challenges. 
Low participation can be due to lack of re-
ferrals, logistical issues (e.g., accessibility, 
timing), cost, and lack of a perceived bene-
ﬁt (53). Thus, in addition to educating re-
ferring health care professionals about the 
beneﬁts of DSMES and the critical times to 
refer, efforts to identify and address poten-
tial barriers at all levels need to be made 
(2). This was illustrated in a multilevel dia-
betes care intervention that combined clin-
ical outreach, standardized protocols, and 
DSMES, with SDOH screening and referrals 
to social needs support. A 15% increase 
in receipt of DSMES, including among 
people on Medicaid, was documented (54). 
Support from institutional leadership is 
foundational for DSMES success. Expert 
stakeholders, including those external to 
an organization, should also support DSMES 
by advocating for it and for people with 
diabetes (10). 
Diabetes Technologies 
Technology-enabled diabetes self-
management solutions (e.g., continuous 
glucose monitors [CGM], automated insu-
lin delivery [AID] systems, and connected 
glucose meters) improve A1C most effec-
tively when there is two-way communica-
tion between the person with diabetes and 
the health care team, individualized (e.g., tai-
lored to suit a particular person for their 
needs) feedback, use of person-generated 
health data, and education (55). Technology 
can facilitate self-management decisions and 
improve access to DSMES (55). Use of dia-
betes technologies warrants broader 
adoption because they can reduce thera-
peutic inertia and should be explored as 
part of continuous improvement (55,56). 
One potential model is virtual environ-
ments, which allow people with diabetes 
to self-represent as avatars and interact in 
a world with embedded informational re-
sources accessed using principles of gami-
ﬁcation. An example of this is from an RCT 
that tested DSMES in a virtual environment 
that demonstrated greater weight loss and 
similar decreases in A1C, blood pressure, 
cholesterol, and triglycerides compared 
with DSMES via a standard website (57). 
These nontraditional versions of DSMES 
may not always be reimbursed; however, 
adopting reimbursement policies that in-
crease DSMES access and use will positively 
affect beneﬁciaries’ clinical outcomes, qual-
ity of life, health care use, and costs (10,58). 
Of all the newer diabetes technologies, 
CGM might be the most widely adopted. 
When combined with individualized DSMES 
or behavioral interventions, CGM demon-
strated greater improvement of glycemic 
and psychosocial outcomes than CGM alone 
(59,60). Similarly, DSMES plus intermittently 
scanned CGM (isCGM) demonstrated in-
creased time in range (70–180 mg/dL [3.9– 
10.0 mmol/L]), less time above range, and 
greater reduction in A1C compared with 
DSMES alone (61). Incorporating a system-
atic approach for technology assessment, 
adoption, and integration into the diabetes 
care plan could help ensure equity in access 
and standardized application of technology-
enabled solutions (9,47,62–64). 
Reimbursement 
Medicare reimburses DSMES (known as 
diabetes self-management training [DSMT] 
by Medicare) when the services are pro-
vided in accordance with the National 
Standards for DSMES (2,10) and is recog-
nized by the American Diabetes Association 
(ADA) through the Education Recogni-
tion Program (professional.diabetes.org/ 
diabetes-education) or by the Associa-
tion of Diabetes Care & Education Spe-
cialists (ADCES) (https://www.adces.org/ 
diabetes-education-dsmes/diabetes-
education-accreditation-program). 
DSMES is also covered by most insurance 
plans. Ongoing support has been shown to 
be instrumental for improving outcomes 
when it is implemented after the comple-
tion of formal DSMES. For comprehensive 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S92 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
information about Medicare reimbursement, 
readers may ﬁnd the following website use-
ful: www.cdc.gov/diabetes-toolkit/php/ 
reimbursement/medicare-reimbursement-
guidelines.html. In brief, the Medicare Part 
B initial  DSMT i s a “ once-in-a-lifetime” ben-
eﬁt. Individual encounters are reimbursable 
for the ﬁrst 10 h (1 h of individual training 
and 9  h of g roup training). T wo h ours  of
follow-up DSMT are allowed each year after 
the initial DSMT. If a person has special needs 
that could interfere with effective group 
participation, these should be identiﬁed 
on the referral order to allow for individual 
sessions. For Medicaid, DSMES coverage 
varies by state, but further guidance can 
be found at https://coveragetoolkit.org/ 
evidence-based-programs/diabetes-self-
management-education-and-support/. 
Additional information addressing imple-
mentation of a successful DSMES program 
can be found in the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention DSMES toolkit at www 
.cdc.gov/diabetes-toolkit/php/index.html. 
Programs recognized by the ADA and 
accredited by the ADCES were included 
on the list of telehealth professionals ap-
proved by Centers for Medicare & Medic-
aid Services (CMS) via the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act of 2023 (65). However, 
as of 1 October 2025, Medicare recipients 
must be in a U.S.-based rural ofﬁce or 
medical facility for most telehealth services 
(66,67). 
DSMES uses an evidence-based curric-
ulum designed to educate people with 
diabetes about all elements from the Na-
tional Standards for DSMES, as described 
above, that can be delivered and billed 
by a variety of health care professionals 
on the diabetes care team. While the over-
arching healthy eating concepts used in 
DSMES can be taught by all members of 
the team, MNT, which is more in-depth 
and individualized (e.g., tailored to suit 
a particular person for their sociocultural 
preferences and needs) and derived from 
the evidence-based Nutrition Care Pro-
cess, can only be delivered and billed by 
RDNs. For Medicare Part B, the MNT ben-
eﬁt includes individual encounters billed 
3 h i n t he ﬁ rst year of the beneﬁt. Each 
subsequent y ear c an be  billed up to 2  h.
However, additional hours are available if 
a subsequent referral identiﬁes a change 
in treatment. For further information on 
Medicare coverage of MNT, readers are en-
couraged to review www.cdc.gov/diabetes-
toolkit/php/reimbursement/medical-nutrition-
therapy.html. 
 
 
MEDICAL NUTRITION THERAPY 
When the ﬁrst ADA Standards of Care 
guidelines were published in 1989, nutri-
tion was mentioned in only two sentences 
of the entire 4-page document (68). Even 
today, the science of nutrition for diabetes 
continues to evolve. There has also been a 
change in how we talk about nutrition. We 
continue to encourage health care pro-
fessionals to shift away from emphasizing 
macronutrients (i.e., carbohydrates, pro-
teins, and fats) and micronutrients (i.e., 
vitamins and minerals) and to instead fo-
cus on foods. More broadly, we encourage 
people to think in terms of eating patterns, 
also known as dietary patterns or food 
patterns, or the totality of the foods and 
beverages a person consumes. Additionally, 
encourage nutrient-dense food choices. 
Nutrient dense is deﬁned as foods high in 
micronutrients while being relatively low 
in calories (e.g., vegetables, fruits, and 
legumes). This integrative food-based ap-
proach aligns with numerous guidelines 
from multiple professional health societies 
(69–71) and the Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans, 2020–2025 (72). Simply put, 
people eat food, not nutrients, and nutrition 
recommendations need to be applicable to 
what people actually eat. Additionally, mac-
ronutrients are not interchangeable entities 
and vary by nutrient type and quality. For 
example, carbohydrates include legumes, 
whole grains, and fruits, which are in the 
same category as reﬁned grains, but their 
health effects are quite different (73). 
MNT is effective and beneﬁcial to peo-
ple with diabetes. When delivered by an 
RDN, MNT is associated with A1C absolute 
decreases of 1.0–1.9% for people with 
type 1 diabetes and 0.3–2.0% for people 
with type 2 diabetes (74). Because diabe-
tes is progressive, b ehavior  modiﬁcation 
alone may not be adequate to maintain 
euglycemia over time. However, even 
after pharmacotherapy is initiated, MNT 
continues to be an important component 
of ongoing diabetes self-management, and 
RDNs providing diabetes-speciﬁc MNT
should assess and monitor medication 
changes in relation to nutrition care plans 
(46,75). All health care team members should 
be empowered to reiterate the general and 
evidence-based nutrition advice promoted 
herein—limit processed foods and foods 
high in added salt, sugars, and fats and, 
when possible, choose whole foods. 
For more detailed information on nu-
trition therapy for people with diabetes, 
 
please refer to the ADA consensus report 
on nutrition therapy (46). Contained in 
the report is an important and often re-
peated tenet, i.e., there is no one-size-
ﬁts-all eating pattern for individuals with 
diabetes, and meal planning should be in-
dividualized. Nutrition therapy plays an 
integral role in overall diabetes manage-
ment, and each person with diabetes 
should actively engage in education, self-
management, and treatment planning 
with the health care team and participate 
in collaborative development of an individ-
ualized eating plan (46,75). 
All people with diabetes should be re-
ferred for individualized MNT provided by 
an RDN who is experienced and skilled in 
providing diabetes-speciﬁc MNT ( 76–78), 
at diagnosis and as needed throughout 
the life span,  like DSMES. R eferrals t o RDNs
are particularly warranted when a person 
with diabetes is dealing with additional 
health conditions such as hypertension, 
dyslipidemia, heart failure, gastrointestinal 
disorders, chronic kidney disease (CKD), 
pregnancy-related nutrition concerns, pe-
diatric growth issues, or obesity (79). See 
Table 5.1 for nutrition recommendations 
and Table 5.2 for nutrition behaviors that 
should be encouraged. 
Eating Patterns and Meal Planning 
To better understand the role of nutrition in 
diabetes, it is important to clarify terminology. 
Food patterns, eating plans, and approaches 
are terms that are often used interchange-
ably, but they are different and relevant in in-
dividualizing nutrition care plans (80). 
• Eating pattern, dietary pattern, or food 
pattern. The totality of all foods and 
beverages consumed over a given pe-
riod of time. An eating pattern can be 
ascribed to an individual, but it is also 
the term used in prospective cohort and 
observational nutrition studies to classify 
nutrition patterns. Examples include Med-
iterranean style, Dietary Approaches to 
Stop Hypertension (DASH), low carbohy-
drate, vegetarian, and plant based (80). 
• Eating/meal plan (historically referred 
to as a diet). An individualized guide 
to plan when, what, and how much to 
eat on a daily basis, completed by the 
person with diabetes and the RDN. The 
eating plan could incorporate an eating 
pattern combined with a strategy to di-
rect some of the choices. Eating plans 
are based on an individual’s usual
 
 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
eating style, cultural background, SDOH, 
and food preferences.  
• Eating/meal plan approach. Method 
to individualize a desired eating pattern 
and provide practical tools for developing 
healthy eating patterns. Examples include 
the plate method, carbohydrate choice, 
carbohydrate counting, and highly in-
dividualized behavioral approaches 
(81). 
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S93 
Table 5.1—Nutrition recommendations 
Recommendations 
5.10 Provide individualized medical nutrition therapy by referring people with prediabetes or diabetes to a registered dietitian nutritionist, 
preferably one who has comprehensive experience in diabetes care. A 
5.11 Diabetes medical nutrition therapy can result in cost savings B and improved cardiometabolic outcomes A and should be reimbursed by 
insurance. E 
5.12 Provide an overweight or obesity treatment plan based on their nutrition, physical activity, and behavioral health status for all people 
with overweight or obesity, aiming for at least 5–7% weight loss. A 
5.13 For diabetes prevention and management of people with prediabetes or diabetes, recommend individualized meal plans that keep 
nutrient quality, total calories, and metabolic goals in mind. B 
5.14 Eating patterns should emphasize key nutrition principles (inclusion of nonstarchy vegetables, whole fruits, legumes, lean proteins, 
whole grains, nuts and seeds, and low-fat dairy or nondairy alternatives) and minimize consumption of red meat, sugar-sweetened 
beverages, sweets, reﬁned grains, processed and ultraprocessed foods in people with prediabetes and diabetes. B 
5.15 Consider reducing carbohydrate intake for some adults with diabetes to improve glycemia. An effective way to achieve this is by limiting 
consumption of processed foods. B 
5.16 Assess intake of supplements, as supplementation with micronutrients (e.g., vitamins and minerals, such as magnesium or chromium) or 
herbs or spices (e.g., cinnamon and aloe vera) is not recommended for glycemic beneﬁts. C 
5.17 Counsel against β-carotene supplementation, as there is evidence of harm for certain individuals and it confers no beneﬁt. B 
5.18 Advise adults with diabetes and those at risk for diabetes who consume alcohol to not exceed the recommended daily limits. B Advise 
abstainers to not start drinking alcohol, even in moderation. B 
5.19 Counsel people with diabetes about the signs, symptoms, and self-management of delayed hypoglycemia and the importance of 
monitoring glucose after drinking alcohol to reduce hypoglycemia risk, especially when using insulin or insulin secretagogues. B 
5.20 Counsel people with diabetes to limit sodium consumption to <2,300 mg/day, as clinically appropriate, and the best way to achieve this 
is through limiting consumption of processed foods. B 
5.21 Encourage people with diabetes and those at risk for diabetes to consume water over other beverages. A 
5.22 Counsel people with diabetes and those at risk for diabetes that nonnutritive sweeteners can be used in place of sugar-sweetened 
products if consumed in moderation and for the short term to reduce overall calorie and carbohydrate intake. B 
5.23 Counsel and regularly monitor individuals pursuing intentional weight loss to ensure adequate nutritional intake, with particular 
attention to preventing protein insufﬁciency and micronutrient deﬁciencies. E 
5.24 Emphasize minimally processed, nutrient-dense, high-ﬁber sources of carbohydrate (at least 14 g ﬁber per 1,000 kcal). B 
5.25 Advise people with diabetes and those at risk for diabetes to replace sugar-sweetened beverages (including any juices) with water or 
low-calorie or no-calorie beverages and minimize foods with added sugar to manage glycemia and reduce risk for cardiometabolic 
disease. B 
5.26 Educate individuals with diabetes who are at risk for developing diabetic ketoacidosis and who are treated with sodium–glucose 
cotransporter inhibition on the risks and signs of ketoacidosis and methods of risk mitigation management, provide them with 
appropriate tools for ketone measurement (i.e., serum β-hydroxybutyrate), and discourage a ketogenic eating pattern. E 
5.27 Provide education on the glycemic impact of carbohydrate, A fat, and protein B tailored to an individual’s needs, insulin plan, and 
preferences for care to optimize mealtime insulin dosing. 
5.28 Counsel people using ﬁxed insulin doses about consistent patterns of carbohydrate intake with respect to time and amount while 
considering the insulin action time, as it can result in improved glycemia and reduce the risk for hypoglycemia. B 
5.29 Counsel people with diabetes and those at risk for diabetes to incorporate more plant-based protein sources (e.g., nuts, seeds, and 
legumes) as part of an overall diverse eating pattern to reduce cardiovascular disease risk. B 
5.30 Counsel people with diabetes and those at risk for diabetes to consider an eating plan emphasizing elements of a Mediterranean 
eating pattern, which is rich in fatty ﬁsh, nuts, and seeds, to reduce cardiovascular disease risk A and improve glucose 
metabolism. B 
5.31 Counsel people with diabetes and those at risk for diabetes to limit intake of foods high in saturated fat to help reduce cardiovascular 
disease risk. B 
Meal Planning 
There is no ideal percentage of calories 
from carbohydrate, protein, or fat for 
people with diabetes. Therefore, macronu-
trient distribution should be based on an 
individualized assessment of current eating 
patterns, preferences, and metabolic goals. 
Members of the health care team should 
complement and reinforce MNT by pro-
viding evidence-based guidance to help 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S94 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
people with diabetes make healthy food 
choices that meet their individualized needs 
and improve overall health. Ultimately, 
ongoing diabetes and nutrition education 
paired with appropriate support to im-
plement and sustain health behaviors are 
recommended (78). 
Table 5.2-Nutrition behaviors to encourage 
• Vegetables—especially nonstarchy vegetables that are dark green, red, and orange in color; fresh, frozen, or low-sodium canned are all 
acceptable vegetable options. 
• Legumes—dried beans, peas, and lentils. 
• Fruits—especially whole fruit—fresh, frozen, or canned in own juice (or no added sugar) are all acceptable fruit options. 
• Foods with at least 3 g of ﬁber per serving are generally considered higher ﬁber choices. Whole-grain foods—where culturally appropri-
ate, whole-grain versions of commonly consumed foods, such as 100% whole-wheat breads or pastas and brown rice. When not culturally 
appropriate, focus more on portion control. 
• Water should be the primary beverage of choice. 
• For individuals who do not prefer plain water, no-calorie alternatives are the next best choice. Options include adding lemon, lime, ber-
ries, or cucumber slices to water; sparkling no-calorie water or ﬂavored no-calorie waters; no-calorie carbonated beverages. 
• Plant-based proteins can include legumes (e.g., soybeans, pinto beans, black beans, garbanzo beans, dried peas, and lentils), nuts, and seeds. 
• Meats and poultry should be from fresh, frozen, or low-sodium canned and in lean forms (e.g., chicken breast and ground turkey). 
• Heart-healthy wild-caught fatty ﬁsh such as salmon, tuna, sardines, and mackerel. Fresh, frozen, or low-sodium canned are all acceptable 
options. 
• Use herbs (e.g., basil, fennel, mint, parsley, rosemary, and thyme) and spices (e.g., cinnamon, garam masala, ginger, pepper, and tur-
meric) to season foods instead of salt or salt-containing preparations. 
• Incorporate onions, garlic, celery, carrots, and other vegetables as a base for preparing various homemade foods. 
• Cook with vegetable oil (e.g., avocado, canola, and olive) in place of fats high in saturated fat (e.g., butter, coconut oil, lard, and 
shortening). 
• Plan out meals for the week. Grocery shop using a list. Cook on a day off so there are ready-to-eat and ready-to-reheat homemade 
meals waiting in the fridge or freezer. 
• Include family or roommates in meal preparation; share the responsibilities of grocery shopping and cooking and use time off for meal 
preparation in advance when possible. 
Research conﬁrms a variety of eating pat-
terns are acceptable for diabetes manage-
ment (46,74,82,83). Evidence-based eating 
patterns most frequently recommended 
include Mediterranean, DASH, low-fat, car-
bohydrate-restricted, vegetarian, and vegan 
eating patterns. Until evidence around ben-
eﬁts of speciﬁc eating patterns is strength-
ened, health care professionals should focus 
on the common core characteristics among 
healthful patterns: inclusion of nonstarchy 
vegetables, whole fruits, legumes, whole 
grains, nuts, seeds, and low-fat dairy prod-
ucts or nondairy replacements and mini-
mizing consumption of red meat, sugar-
sweetened beverages, sweets, reﬁned 
grains, and processed and ultraprocessed 
foods (84,85). The recent Dietary Ap-
proaches to Stop Hypertension for Diabe-
tes (DASH4D) RCT further supports this 
guidance (86). In their randomized cross-
over feeding study conducted from 2021 
to 2024, adults with type 2 diabetes and 
hypertension improved time in range 
(mean difference 5.2%; P < 0.001) and 
blood pressure. The intervention eating 
pattern was moderate in carbohydrates 
(45% of total calories), rich in fruits, veg-
etables, whole grains, lean proteins, and 
low-fat dairy, and low in saturated fat, 
sugar-sweetened beverages, and sodium. 
Referral to and ongoing support from 
an RDN is essential to assess the overall 
nutrition status of the person with diabe-
tes. RDNs work collaboratively with peo-
ple to create a personalized meal plan 
aligned with the overall lifestyle treatment 
plan, including physical activity, work and 
life schedules, and medication use. Using 
shared decision-making to execute the 
plan is also often part of the nutrition 
care process. 
Eating/Meal Plan Approaches and Methods 
Few head-to-head studies have compared 
different eating approaches. The diabetes 
plate method (87) is a commonly used 
visual approach for providing basic meal 
planning guidance for individuals with 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes. One RCT found 
that both the diabetes plate method and 
carbohydrate counting were effective in 
helping achieve improved A1C (88). The 
diabetes plate method uses a simple 
graphic (featuring a 9-in plate) to portion 
foods (one-half of the plate for non-
starchy vegetables, one-quarter of the 
plate for protein, and one-quarter of the 
plate for carbohydrates). 
Carbohydrate counting is a more ad-
vanced skill that helps plan for and track 
how much carbohydrate is consumed at 
meals and snacks. In a systematic review 
and meta-analysis of carbohydrate count-
ing versus other forms of meal planning 
advice (e.g., standard education, low gly-
cemic index [GI], and ﬁxed carbohydrate 
quantities), no signiﬁcant differences were 
seen in A1C levels compared with standard 
education (89). In another RCT, a simpli-
ﬁed carbohydrate counting tool based on 
individual glycemic response was noninfe-
rior to conventional carbohydrate count-
ing in 85 adults with type 1 diabetes (90). 
In a randomized crossover trial, carbohy-
drate counting and qualitative meal size 
(i.e., low, medium, and high carbohydrate) 
were compared. Time in range was 74% 
for carbohydrate counting and 70.5% for 
the quantitative meal size estimates. Non-
inferiority was not conﬁrmed for the qual-
itative method (91). Newer technologies 
(e.g., smart phone apps and CGM) and 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S95 
AID systems may reduce the need for 
precise carbohydrate counting and al-
low for personalized nutrition approaches 
(92,93). 
Meal planning approaches should be 
customized to the individual, including 
their numeracy and food literacy level 
(88). Health numeracy refers to under-
standing and using numbers and numeri-
cal concepts in relation to health and 
self-management. Food literacy gener-
ally describes proﬁciency in food-related 
knowledge and skills that ultimately af-
fect health, although speciﬁc deﬁnitions 
vary across initiatives (94,95). 
Nutrition Therapy Goals for All 
People With Diabetes 
1. To promote and support healthful 
eating patterns, emphasizing a vari-
ety of nutrient-dense foods in appro-
priate portion sizes, contributing to 
improved overall health, and to: 
• achieve and maintain body weight 
goals 
• attain individualized glycemic, blood 
pressure, and lipid goals 
• delay or prevent the complications 
of diabetes 
2. To address individual nutrition needs 
based on personal and cultural prefer-
ences, health literacy and numeracy, 
access to healthful foods, willingness 
and ability to make behavioral changes, 
and existing barriers to change 
3. To maintain the pleasure of eating by 
providing nonjudgmental messages 
about food choices while also reducing 
or limiting certain foods only when in-
dicated by scientiﬁc evidence 
4. To provide an individual with diabetes 
the practical tools for developing healthy 
eating patterns rather than focusing 
on individual macronutrients, micro-
nutrients, or single foods 
Carbohydrates 
Studies examining the optimal amount of 
carbohydrate intake for people with dia-
betes are inconclusive, although monitor-
ing carbohydrate intake is a key strategy 
in reaching glucose goals in people with 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes (96,97). 
The amount of carbohydrate intake for 
people with type 2 diabetes has been a 
focus of research for many years. System-
atic reviews and meta-analyses of RCTs 
report carbohydrate-restricted eating pat-
terns, particularly those considered very 
low carbohydrate (<26% total energy), 
were effective in reducing A1C in the short 
term (<6 months), w ith l ess d ifference i n  
eating patterns beyond 1 year (80,98,99). 
However, in a 12-week RCT among adults 
with prediabetes and type 2 diabetes, a 
well-formulated ketogenic eating pattern 
(20–50 g total carbohydrate/day and keep-
ing protein to ∼1.5 g/kg ideal body weight/ 
day, with the remainder of energy from 
fat) did not signiﬁcantly improve A1C and 
increased LDL cholesterol compared with 
a low-carbohydrate Mediterranean eating 
pattern (99). Additionally, a systematic re-
view and meta-analysis of six RCTs at least 
12 months in duration and including a 
total of 524 participants with type 2 di-
abetes reported that a low-carbohydrate 
eating pattern was beneﬁcial for lipids but 
not glycemic management (standardized 
mean difference −0.11, 95% CI −0.33 to 
0.11, P = 0.32) (100). 
Reduction in body weight and the wide 
range of deﬁnitions for low-carbohydrate 
eating plans are important challenges in 
interpreting carbohydrate-restricted re-
search studies (101–103). As studies on 
low-carbohydrate eating plans generally in-
dicate challenges with long-term sustain-
ability (104), it is important to reassess and 
individualize meal plan guidance regularly 
for those interested in this approach. 
Health care professionals should main-
tain consistent medical oversight of indi-
viduals following very-low-carbohydrate 
eating plans and recognize that insulin and 
other diabetes medications may need to 
be adjusted to prevent hypoglycemia, and 
blood pressure will need to be monitored. 
In addition, very-low-carbohydrate eating 
plans are not currently recommended 
for individuals who are pregnant or lactat-
ing, children, people who have kidney 
disease, or people with or at risk for dis-
ordered eating (46). 
Very-low-carbohydrate eating plans 
should be avoided in those taking 
sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) 
inhibitors because of the potential risk of 
ketoacidosis (105,106). Numerous case 
reports have now been published illus-
trating that diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) 
can occur in people with type 1 and type 2 
diabetes using SGLT2 inhibitors in combi-
nation with very-low-carbohydrate or 
ketogenic eating patterns. Addition-
ally, excessive alcohol intake should be 
avoided when taking SGLT2 inhibitors 
(105). Maintaining adequate hydration is 
also very important. 
Regardless of carbohydrate quantity in 
the meal plan, the focus should be on 
high-quality, minimally processed, nutrient-
dense, high-ﬁber carbohydrate sources. Fi-
ber modulates gut microbiota composition 
and increases gut microbial diversity. Al-
though there is still much to be elucidated 
about the gut microbiome and chronic 
disease, higher-ﬁber eating patterns are 
advantageous (107). Both children and 
adults with diabetes are encouraged to 
minimize intake of reﬁned carbohydrates 
with added sugars, fat, and sodium and 
instead focus on carbohydrates from veg-
etables, legumes, fruits, dairy (milk and 
yogurt) or fortiﬁed nondairy alternatives, 
and whole grains. People with diabetes 
and those at risk for diabetes are encour-
aged to consume a minimum of 14 g of 
ﬁber/1,000 kcal, with at least half of grain 
consumption being whole, intact grains, 
according to the Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans, 2020–2025 (72). Regular in-
take of sufﬁcient ﬁber is associated with 
lower all-cause mortality in people with 
diabetes, and prospective cohort studies 
have found ﬁber intake is inversely associ-
ated with risk for type 2 diabetes (108, 
109). Consumption of sugar-sweetened 
beverages and processed food products 
with large amounts of reﬁned grains and 
added sugars is strongly discouraged (72), 
as these can displace healthier, more nu-
trient-dense foods and increase inﬂam-
mation (110). 
The literature on GI and glycemic load 
(GL) in individuals with diabetes is complex, 
often with varying deﬁnitions of low- and 
high-GI foods (111–113). The GI ranks car-
bohydrate foods on their postprandial gly-
cemic response, and GL considers both the 
GI of foods and the amount of carbohy-
drate eaten. Studies report mixed effects 
of GI and GL on fasting glucose levels and 
A1C, with one systematic review ﬁnding no 
signiﬁcant effect on A1C (112) while others 
demonstrated A1C reductions of 0.15% 
(111) to 0.5% (114,115). More recently, 
however, a meta-analysis of large cohorts 
(≥100,000 participants) reported that when 
people had larger intakes of high-GI foods, 
there was increased incidence of type 2 
diabetes (risk ratio 1.27 [95% CI 1.21–1.34]; 
P < 0.0001), total cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) (1.15 [1.11–1.19]; P < 0.0001), dia-
betes-related cancer (1.05 [1.02–1.08]; 
P = 0.0010), and all-cause mortality (1.08 
[1.05–1.12]; P < 0.0001) (113). It is impor-
tant to note that low GI or low GL is synon-
ymous with higher-ﬁber eating patterns. 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S96 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Individuals with type 1 or type 2 dia-
betes taking insulin at mealtime should be 
offered comprehensive and ongoing ed-
ucation about nutrition content and the 
need to couple insulin administration with 
carbohydrate intake. For people whose 
meal schedule or carbohydrate consump-
tion is variable, education on the relation-
ship between carbohydrate intake and 
insulin needs is important. In addition, as-
sessing food literacy, numeracy, interest, 
and capability should be evaluated, es-
pecially if teaching more advanced meth-
ods of MNT diabetes management such 
as insulin-to-carbohydrate ratios. Teaching 
insulin-to-carbohydrate ratios for meal 
planning can assist individuals with effec-
tively modifying insulin dosing from meal 
to meal to improve glycemic manage-
ment (74,96). Consumption of fat and 
protein can affect early and delayed post-
prandial glycemia (116), and it appears to 
have a dose-dependent response (117,118). 
However, more research is needed to de-
termine the optimal insulin dose and de-
livery strategy. A cautious approach to 
increasing insulin doses for high-fat and/or 
high-protein mixed meals is recommended 
to address delayed hyperglycemia that 
may occur after eating (46,119). For indi-
viduals using an insulin pump, a split bolus 
feature (part of the bolus delivered imme-
diately and the remainder over a pro-
grammed duration of time) may provide 
better insulin coverage for high-fat and/or 
high-protein mixed meals (120,121). 
Insulin dosing decisions should be con-
ﬁrmed with a structured approach to blood 
glucose monitoring or CGM to evaluate in-
dividual responses and guide insulin dose 
adjustments. Checking glucose 3 h after 
eating may help determine if additional 
insulin adjustments are required (i.e., in-
creasing or stopping bolus) (120,121). For 
individuals on a ﬁxed daily insulin sched-
ule, meal planning should emphasize a 
relatively ﬁxed carbohydrate consumption 
pattern with respect to both time and 
amount while considering insulin action. 
Attention to hunger and satiety cues also 
helps (46). 
Most commercially available AID 
systems still require basic diabetes 
management skills, including carbohy-
drate counting and understanding of the 
effect of protein and fat on postprandial 
glucose response, but the algorithms in-
cluded in the systems work with less ac-
curate carbohydrate entry (122,123). 
The most advanced AID system provides 
adaptive closed-loop algorithms enabling 
fully autonomous insulin delivery automati-
cally titrating all therapeutic insulins, includ-
ing basal, correction, and prandial insulins. 
For more on AID and carbohydrates, see 
section 7, “Diabetes Technology.” 
Protein 
There is no evidence that adjusting the daily 
protein intake above or below the recom-
mended amount for the general public 
(typically 0.8–1.5 g/kg body weight/day 
or 15–20% of total calories) will improve 
health, and research is inconclusive regard-
ing the ideal amount of dietary protein to 
optimize either glycemic management or 
CVD risk (72,124). Therefore, protein intake 
goals should be individualized based on 
current eating patterns. Some research 
has found successful management of 
type 2 diabetes with meal plans including 
slightly higher levels of protein (20–30%), 
which may contribute to increased sati-
ety (125). 
Historically, low-protein eating plans 
were advised for individuals with diabe-
tes-related CKD (with albuminuria and/or 
reduced estimated glomerular ﬁltration 
rate [eGFR]); however, current evidence 
does not suggest that people with CKD 
need to restrict protein to less than the 
generally recommended protein intake 
(126). Reducing the amount of protein 
below the recommended daily allowance 
of 0.8 g/kg is not recommended because 
it does not alter glycemic measures, car-
diovascular risk measures, or the rate at 
which eGFR declines and may increase 
risk for malnutrition (126). 
Growing evidence suggests higher plant 
protein intake and replacement of animal 
protein with plant protein is associated 
with lower risk of all-cause and cardiovas-
cular mortality. A meta-analysis of 13 RCTs 
showed that replacing animal proteins 
with plant proteins leads to small improve-
ments  in A1C  and fasting  glucose  in adults  
with type 2 diabetes (127). A 2023 system-
atic review and meta-analysis of 13 RCTs 
and 7 cohort studies concluded that there 
is limited suggestive evidence to support 
replacing animal protein with plant-based 
protein based on a moderate degree of 
bias in cohort studies (128). However, a 
prospective observational study of more 
than 11,000 community-dwelling adults 
over 22 years of follow-up reported that 
those with higher intakes of plant foods 
and lower intakes of animal foods had 
lower diabetes risk (129). Plant proteins 
are lower in saturated fat, higher in ﬁber, 
and also support planetary health (130). 
Fats 
There is no optimal percentage of calo-
ries from fat for people with or at risk for 
diabetes, and macronutrient distribution 
should be individualized according to the 
individual’s eating patterns, cultural and 
personal preferences, and metabolic goals 
(46). The type of fat consumed is more im-
portant than total amount of fat when 
looking at metabolic goals and CVD risk, 
and the percentage of total calories 
from saturated fats should be limited 
(72,131–133). Multiple RCTs including 
people with type 2 diabetes have reported 
that a Mediterranean eating pattern can 
improve both glycemic management and 
blood lipids (134–136). The Mediterranean 
eating pattern is based on traditional eat-
ing patterns in the countries bordering the 
Mediterranean Sea. Although eating styles 
vary by country and culture (i.e., customs 
and behaviors of a particular group of peo-
ple or other social group), they share a 
number of common features, including 
consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables, 
whole grains, beans, and nuts/seeds; olive 
oil as the primary fat source; low to moder-
ate amounts of ﬁsh, eggs, and poultry; and 
limited added sugars, sugary beverages, so-
dium, highly processed foods, reﬁned car-
bohydrates, saturated fats, and fatty or 
processed meats. 
People with diabetes should be ad-
vised to follow the same guidelines as the 
general population for the recommended 
intakes of saturated fat, cholesterol, and 
trans fat (72). In a 12-week double-blinded 
randomized controlled feeding study among 
61 adults with overweight and obesity, 
without diabetes, higher intakes of satu-
rated fat, compared with polyunsaturated  
fat, were found to increase liver fat deposi-
tion (137). A 2021 systematic review and 
meta-analysis including over 22,500 pro-
spective study participants followed for 
9.8 years reported that replacing saturated 
fats with other macronutrients, such as 
polyunsaturated fats, was associated with 
reduced CVD occurrence (138). Trans fats 
should be avoided. Importantly, it should 
be noted that as foods high in saturated 
fats are progressively decreased, they 
should be replaced with foods high in un-
saturated fats and not with reﬁned carbo-
hydrate foods (139). 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S97 
Evidence does not conclusively support 
recommending n-3 (eicosapentaenoic acid 
and docosahexaenoic acid) supplements 
for people with diabetes for the preven-
tion or treatment of cardiovascular events 
(46,140). In individuals with type 2 diabe-
tes, two systematic reviews with n-3 and 
n-6 fatty acids concluded that the dietary 
supplements did not improve glycemic 
management (141,142). In the ASCEND (A 
Study of Cardiovascular Events iN Diabetes) 
trial, when compared with placebo, supple-
mentation with n-3 fatty acids at a dose of 
1 g/day did not lead to cardiovascular ben-
eﬁt in people with diabetes without evi-
dence of CVD (143). However, results from 
the Reduction of Cardiovascular Events 
with Icosapent Ethyl-Intervention Trial 
(REDUCE-IT) found that supplementation 
with 4 g/day pure eicosapentaenoic acid 
signiﬁcantly lowered the risk of adverse 
cardiovascular events. REDUCE-IT included 
8,179 participants, of whom over 50% had 
diabetes, and found a 5% absolute reduc-
tion in cardiovascular events for individuals 
with established atherosclerotic CVD al-
ready treated with a statin with residual 
hypertriglyceridemia (135–499 mg/dL 
[1.52–5.63 mmol/L]) (144). See section 
10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk 
Management,” for more information. 
Sodium 
As for the general population, people with 
diabetes are advised to limit their sodium 
consumption to <2,300 mg/day (46,145). 
Sodium intake has been shown to medi-
ate glucose metabolism in a number of 
studies and affect eGFR, so limiting so-
dium intake is a valuable strategy for peo-
ple with diabetes with or without kidney 
disease (145,146). In their post hoc analy-
sis of the DASH-sodium RCT, Morales-
Alvarez et al. (147) reported that partici-
pants randomized to the low-sodium DASH 
eating pattern (containing ∼1,150 mg 
sodium/day [50 mmol sodium/day]) had 
change in eGFR of 
 
–3.10 mL/min/1.73 m2
(95% CI –5.46 to –0.73) after 4 weeks 
compared with 3,450 mg sodium/day 
(150 mmol sodium/day). 
The DASH4D trial, which was a ran-
domized 4-period crossover community-
based feeding study, reported that in 
comparison with the eating pattern for-
mulated with higher levels of sodium, the 
DASH4D eating pattern with lower so-
dium (1,500 mg/day at 2,000 kcal) re-
sulted in improved systolic blood pressure 
by 4.6 mmHg (95% CI, 7.2–2.0; P < 0.001) 
and diastolic blood pressure by 2.3 mmHg 
(95% CI, 3.7–0.9) (86). It was noted that 
the largest blood pressure reduction oc-
curred during the ﬁrst 3 weeks of each 
treatment period, and the effect of sodium 
reduction appeared stronger than the ef-
fect of the DASH4D eating pattern. 
Limiting sodium intake is most easily 
achieved through focusing on whole, fresh 
foods. Additionally, it is important to reduce 
consumption of processed and ultrapro-
cessed foods, which are major contributors 
of sodium intake. Encouraging people to 
avoid adding salt to foods and during cook-
ing can also help. People providing nutri-
tion advice should consider palatability, 
availability, affordability, clinical appro-
priateness, and the difﬁculty of achieving 
low-sodium recommendations in a nutri-
tionally adequate eating plan. 
Micronutrients and Other 
Supplements 
Despite lack of evidence of beneﬁt from
dietary supplements, consumers continue 
to take them. Estimates show that up to 
59% of people with diabetes in the U.S. 
use supplements (148). Without underly-
ing deﬁciency, there is no beneﬁt from
herbal or other (i.e., vitamin or mineral) 
supplementation for people with diabe-
tes (46,149). 
U.S. federal law broadly deﬁnes dietary 
supplements as products having one or 
more dietary ingredients, including vita-
mins, minerals, herbs or other botanicals, 
amino acids, enzymes, tissues from organs 
or glands, or extracts of these (150). Die-
tary supplements are not regulated like 
other over-the-counter medications or pre-
scription drugs in the U.S. (151). In combi-
nation with the strong views on dietary 
supplements (both positive and negative), 
this can contribute to consumer confusion 
(152). Readers can consult the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) Dietary 
Supplement Ingredient Directory to lo-
cate information about ingredients used 
in dietary supplements and any action 
taken by the agency with regard to that 
ingredient (153). 
Speciﬁc nutrient supplementation for 
people with diabetes is generally not rec-
ommended outside the presence of deﬁ-
ciencies or overt malnutrition. Routine 
antioxidant supplementation (such as vi-
tamins E and C) is not recommended due 
to lack of evidence of efﬁcacy and con-
cern related to long-term safety. Based 
 
 
on the 2022 U.S. Preventative Services Task 
Force statement, the harms of β-carotene 
outweigh the beneﬁts for the prevention 
of CVD or cancer. β-Carotene was associ-
ated with increased lung cancer and car-
diovascular mortality risk (154). 
Vitamin D in the context of diabetes 
has generated much research, but univer-
sal vitamin D supplementation for people 
with type 1 or type 2 diabetes without 
deﬁciency is not recommended at this 
time. Although post hoc analyses of the 
Vitamin D and Type 2 Diabetes Study 
(D2d) prospective RCT and Diabetes Pre-
vention and Active Vitamin D (DPVD) and 
some meta-analyses suggest a potential 
beneﬁt in s peciﬁc populations (155–157), 
other studies have found no beneﬁt or  
mixed results (158–160). Furthermore, 
adopting healthy lifestyle habits, including 
the eating patterns recommended herein, 
are strongly advised. Additional research 
is needed to deﬁne individual characteris-
tics, clinical indicators, and appropriate 
dosages if and when vitamin D supplemen-
tation might beneﬁt people with type 1 or 
type 2 diabetes. 
There is also insufﬁcient evidence to 
support routine use of herbal supple-
ments and micronutrients, such as cinna-
mon (161), curcumin (e.g., turmeric), 
aloe vera, or chromium, to improve gly-
cemia in people with type 1 or type 2 dia-
betes (46). 
While not a dietary supplement, met-
formin is associated with vitamin B12 
deﬁciency based on ﬁndings from the Dia-
betes Prevention Program Outcomes Study 
(DPPOS). Therefore, periodic testing of vita-
min B12 levels should be considered in 
people taking metformin, particularly in 
those with anemia or peripheral neuropa-
thy (162) (see section 9, “Pharmacologic 
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment”). 
For special populations, including preg-
nant or lactating individuals, older adults, 
vegetarians, vegans, and people following 
very-low-calorie or low-carbohydrate eat-
ing patterns, a multivitamin may be nec-
essary (163). 
Alcohol 
Long-term effects of alcohol consumption 
for people with diabetes are unknown. 
The World Health Organization declared 
there is n o safe amount  of alcohol i ntake  
(164,165). Associated risks of alcohol con-
sumption include hypoglycemia and/or 
delayed hypoglycemia (particularly for those 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S98 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
using insulin or insulin secretagogue ther-
apies), weight gain, and hyperglycemia 
(for those consuming excessive amounts) 
(46,166). People with diabetes should be 
educated about these risks and encour-
aged to monitor glucose frequently before 
and after drinking alcohol to minimize such 
risks. People with diabetes who consume 
alcohol can follow the same guidelines as 
people without diabetes consistent with 
the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 
2020–2025 (72), which does not promote 
alcohol consumption in people who do not 
already drink. To reduce risk of alcohol-
related harms, adults can choose not 
to drink or to drink in moderation by lim-
iting intake to ≤2 drinks a day for men or 
≤1 drink a day for women (one drink is 
equal to a 12-oz beer, a 5-oz glass of wine, 
or 1.5 oz of distilled spirits) (72). Recent 
meta-analyses have reported the previ-
ously recognized J-shaped relationship be-
tween alcohol intake and health risks likely 
varies by sex, obesity status, genetics, and 
alcohol intake behaviors (167,168). 
Nonnutritive Sweeteners and Water 
The FDA has approved many nonnutritive 
sweeteners (NNS) (containing few or no 
calories; commonly referred to as artiﬁ-
cial sweeteners) for consumption by the 
general public, including people with dia-
betes (46,169). However, the safety and 
role of NNS c ontinue to be sources  of
concern and confusion for the public. 
For some people with diabetes who are 
accustomed to regularly consuming sugar-
sweetened foods or beverages (e.g., regu-
lar soda pop, juice drinks, and other items 
sweetened with cane sugar or high-fructose 
corn syrup), NNS may be an acceptable 
substitute for nutritive sweeteners (those 
containing calories, such as sugar, honey, 
and agave syrup) when consumed in 
moderation (i.e., consuming no more 
than the acceptable daily intake) (170). 
NNS do not appear to have a signiﬁcant 
effect on glycemic management (171,172), 
and they can reduce overall calorie and 
carbohydrate intake as long as individuals 
are not compensating with additional cal-
ories from other food sources (46,173). A 
meta-analysis and systematic review of 
RCTs found no evidence that NNS raise 
liver enzymes (174). 
There is mixed evidence from system-
atic reviews and meta-analyses for NNS 
use with regard to weight management, 
with some ﬁnding beneﬁt for weight loss 
 
(175–177) while other research suggests 
an association with weight gain (178,179). 
This may be explained by reverse causality 
and residual confounding variables (179). 
The addition of NNS to eating plans 
poses no beneﬁt for weight loss or re-
duced weight gain without energy restric-
tion (180). In a systematic review and 
meta-analysis using low-calorie and no-
calorie sweetened beverages as an in-
tended substitute for sugar-sweetened 
beverages, a small improvement in body 
weight and cardiometabolic risk factors 
was seen without evidence of harm and 
had a d irection of b eneﬁt similar to that 
seen with water (181). While health care 
professionals should promote water as 
the healthiest beverage option, people 
with overweight or obesity and diabetes 
may also use a variety of no-calorie or 
low-calorie sweetened products so that 
they do not feel deprived (181). 
Health care professionals should encour-
age reductions in foods and beverages 
with added sugars and promote reducing 
overall sugar intake and calories with or 
without the use of NNS. Assuring people 
with diabetes that NNS have undergone 
extensive safety evaluation by regulatory 
agencies and are continually monitored 
can allay unnecessary concern for harm. 
Health care professionals can regularly 
assess individual use of NNS based on 
the acceptable daily intake (amount of a 
substance considered safe to consume 
each day over a person’s life) and recom-
mend moderation. Readers are directed 
to the FDA for additional information on 
NNS including safety, graphics, and the 
acceptable daily intake levels for the six 
major ones used in the U.S. (fda.gov/food/ 
food-additives-petitions/aspartame-and-
other-sweeteners-food). 
Weight Management 
Management and reduction of weight is 
important for people with type 1 diabetes, 
type 2 diabetes, or prediabetes with over-
weight or obesity. To support weight loss 
and improve A1C, CVD risk factors, and 
well-being in adults with overweight or 
obesity and prediabetes or diabetes, MNT 
and DSMES services should include an in-
dividualized eating plan resulting in an en-
ergy deﬁcit in combination with enhanced 
physical activity (46). Lifestyle intervention 
programs should be intensive and have 
frequent follow-up to achieve signiﬁcant 
reductions in excess body weight and 
improve clinical indicators. Behavior modi-
ﬁcation goals should address physical ac-
tivity, calorie restriction, healthy weight 
management strategies, and motivation. 
There is strong and consistent evidence 
that modest, sustained weight loss can 
delay the progression from prediabetes 
to type 2 diabetes (78,182,183) (see 
section 3, “Prevention or Delay of Diabetes 
and Associated Comorbidities”) and is ben-
eﬁcial for type 2 diabetes management 
(see section 8, “Obesity and Weight 
Management for the Prevention and 
Treatment Diabetes”). 
In prediabetes, the weight loss goal is at 
least 5–7% from baseline body weight, and 
it is higher for reducing risk of progression 
to type 2 diabetes. Some RCTs report less 
than 5% weight loss in adults with diabetes 
and overweight or obesity following a 
lifestyle behavioral intervention, but this 
limited amount of weight loss has not 
been shown to improve glycemia, lipids, 
or blood pressure; rather, a minimum 
weight loss of 5% or more seems neces-
sary to achieve metabolic improvements 
(184). In conjunction with support for 
healthy lifestyle behaviors, medication-
assisted weight loss can be considered for 
people at risk for type 2 diabetes when 
needed to achieve and sustain 7–10% 
weight loss (185,186) (see section 8, 
“Obesity and Weight Management for the 
Prevention and Treatment of Diabetes”). 
People with prediabetes and healthy 
weight range should also be considered 
for behavioral interventions to help es-
tablish routine aerobic and resistance ex-
ercise (182,187,188) and healthy eating 
patterns. Services delivered by health 
care professionals familiar with diabetes 
and its management, such as an RDN, 
have been found to be effective (77). 
For many individuals with overweight 
or obesity alongside type 2 diabetes, at 
least 5% weight loss is needed to achieve 
beneﬁcial outcomes in glycemic manage-
ment, lipids, and blood pressure (189). 
However, any magnitude of weight loss 
is recommended. It also should be noted 
that the clinical beneﬁts of weight loss are 
progressive, and more intensive weight 
loss goals (i.e., 15%) may be appropriate 
to maximize beneﬁt depending on need, 
feasibility, and safety (190,191). Long-term 
sustainability of weight loss remains a chal-
lenge (192). For example, in some South 
Asian adult populations, traditional inter-
ventions have not been as effective in pre-
vention or remission of type 2 diabetes, so 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S99 
those groups will beneﬁt from  more  cul-
turally tailored interventional approaches 
(193). 
Medications can augment MNT to sup-
port weight loss, weight loss maintenance, 
and improve cardiovascular outcomes. 
Newer medications (e.g., glucagon-like 
peptide 1 receptor agonists [GLP-1 RAs]) 
may be more viable, positively affect car-
diovascular outcomes, and produce weight 
reduction beyond 10–15% (194–198). For 
more information on the nutritional con-
siderations important for people undergo-
ing signiﬁcant weight loss, see MONITORING 
NUTRITION INTAKE, below.  
Overweight and obesity are increasingly 
prevalent in people with type 1 diabetes 
and present clinical challenges regarding 
diabetes treatment and CVD risk factors 
(199,200). T here is s ome evidence that
GLP-1 RAs are useful in achieving weight 
loss among adults with type 1 diabetes, al-
though with a higher risk of nausea and 
ketosis (201). 
 
Regardless of diabetes type, weight 
loss maintenance is challenging (184,202) 
but has well-recognized long-term bene-
ﬁts. Weight loss maintenance physiology 
is complex and involves many hormonal, 
psychosocial, behavioral, and environmen-
tal factors. Following a weight loss of at 
least 8%, a subsequent “weight loss main-
tenance” intervention was reported to be 
only moderately beneﬁcial, as it helped 
sustain physical health improvements but 
not glucose metabolism improvements 
(203). However, in another RCT with long-
term, real-world, clinic-based follow-up of 
10 years, Tomah et al. (204) reported last-
ing glycemic beneﬁts in their cohort with 
an average weight loss of 7.7 ± 0.9 kg 
(−6.9 ± 0.8%) maintained for 10 years. 
with expertise in motivational interviewing 
and diabetes and weight management 
MNT during any comprehensive structured 
weight loss program is strongly recom-
mended. 
Starting a conversation about weight 
management should be based on motiva-
tional interviewing techniques (205), be-
ginning with ﬁrst asking the individual if 
they want to discuss their weight. Health 
care professionals should never assume a 
person with overweight or obesity wants 
to discuss weight at a medical appointment, 
especially if the appointment is for a seem-
ingly unrelated issue (e.g., back pain, 
which many people do not realize is often 
secondary to excess body weight). Using 
person-centered approaches to weight 
management conversations involves meet-
ing the individual where they are in their 
life and working with what they and their 
health care professional agree is the most 
beneﬁcial approach. Guidance from an RDN 
Along with routine medical manage-
ment visits, people with diabetes and pre-
diabetes should be screened during DSMES 
and MNT encounters for a history of diet-
ing and past or current disordered eating 
behaviors. Characterizing an individual’s 
past efforts with weight loss and their 
body weight history can also be very use-
ful. Nutrition therapy should be individual-
ized to help address maladaptive eating 
behavior (e.g., purging) or compensatory 
changes in medical treatment plan (e.g., 
overtreatment of hypoglycemic episodes 
and reduction in medication dosing to re-
duce hunger) (46) (see DISORDERED EATING 
BEHAVIOR, below). Caloric restriction may be 
necessary for glycemic and weight man-
agement, but rigid meal plans and strict 
tracking of food intake and/or body weight 
can be contraindicated for individuals at in-
creased risk of signiﬁcant maladaptive eat-
ing behaviors (206). If eating disorders are 
identiﬁed during screening with diabetes-
speciﬁc questionnaires, individuals should 
be referred to a qualiﬁed behavioral health 
professional (1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regardless of the speciﬁc eating pattern 
or meal plan selected, long-term follow-
up and support from members of the diabe-
tes care team are needed to optimize self-
efﬁcacy and maintain behavioral changes 
(211). 
Meal Replacements 
Use of partial or total meal replacements
is an additional strategy for energy restric-
tion. Meal replacements are prepackaged
foods (bars, shakes, and soups) that con-
tain ﬁxed amounts of macronutrients and
micronutrients. They can improve nutri-
ent quality and glycemic management
and, consequently, reduce portion size
and energy intake. In a meta-analysis in-
volving 17 studies incorporating both par-
tial and total meal replacements, greater
weight loss and improvements in A1C
and fasting blood glucose were demon-
strated compared with conventional meal
plans (207). Furthermore, meal replace-
ments  have  been used in several  land-
mark clinical trials, including Look AHEAD
(Action for Health in Diabetes) (208),
DiRECT (Diabetes Remission Clinical Trial)
(209), and PREVIEW (Prevention of Diabe-
tes Through Lifestyle Intervention and
Population Studies in Europe and Around
the World) (210). Results of these trials
showed that partial or total meal replace-
ments can be a potential short-term (i.e.,
<6 months) strategy for weight loss.
Fasting and Timing of Food Intake 
Chrononutrition is an emerging nutrition 
and biology subspecialty aimed toward 
increasing the understanding of how the 
timing of food ingestion affects metabolic 
health (212). Glucose metabolism follows a 
circadian rhythm through diurnal variation 
of glucose tolerance and peaks during day-
light hours when food is consumed. Some 
preliminary studies show cardiometabolic 
beneﬁts when food is consumed earlier 
(213). Similarly, circadian disruptions found 
in shift workers increase risk of type 2 dia-
betes (214). This evolving area of research 
currently lacks conclusive evidence, but fu-
ture studies are anticipated. 
Nonreligious Fasting 
The primary forms of nonreligious fasting 
are intermittent fasting or time-restricted 
eating. These are popular strategies for 
weight and glucose management. One of 
the key distinctions between nonreligious 
and religious fasting is water intake. See 
Fig. 5.1 for further details on how religious 
and nonreligious fasting practices compare. 
Intermittent fasting is an umbrella 
term that includes three main forms of re-
stricted eating: alternate-day fasting (en-
ergy restriction of 500–600 calories on 
alternate days), the 5:2 eating pattern (en-
ergy restriction of 500–600 calories on 
consecutive or nonconsecutive days with 
usual intake the other ﬁve), and time-
restricted eating (daily calorie restriction 
based on window of time of 8–15 h). Each 
produces mild to moderate weight loss 
(3–8% loss from baseline) over short dura-
tions (8–12 weeks) with no signiﬁcant 
differences in weight loss when com-
pared with continuous calorie restriction 
(215,216). A 2024 systematic review and 
meta-analysis of RCTs examined the most 
common types of fasting in studies lasting 
2–52 weeks. The authors concluded that 
intermittent energy restriction produces 
small but signiﬁcant reductions in waist 
circumference and fat-free mass but were 
otherwise not superior to continuous en-
ergy restriction eating patterns (217). Gen-
erally, time-restricted eating or shortening 
the eating window can be adapted to any 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S100 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Religious and intermittent fasting: differences and similarities 
INTERMITTENT FASTING 
• 
Flexible duration and timing 
• 
Varying levels of intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivation 
• 
Hyperglycemia is less likely as motive is 
health related 
• 
No added risk of dehydration 
RELIGIOUS FASTING 
• 
Fixed duration and timing 
• 
High levels of intrinsic motivation 
• 
Risk of hyperglycemia at end of fasting 
hours with or without ketoacidosis 
• 
Dehydration is possible in some types 
 
Hypoglycemia 
risk 
 
Risk assessment and 
education is essential 
prefasting 
 
Treatment 
adjustment is 
required 
eating pattern and has been shown to be 
safe for adults with type 1 or type 2 diabe-
tes (218). People with diabetes who are 
taking insulin and/or secretagogues should 
be medically monitored during the fasting 
period (219). Because of the simplicity of 
intermittent fasting and time-restricted eat-
ing, these may be useful strategies for peo-
ple with diabetes who are looking for 
practical eating management tools. It 
should also be noted that the principles 
of healthy eating still apply during non-
fasting times. 
Religious Fasting 
Figure 5.1—Differences and similarities between religious and intermittent fasting for people with diabetes. 
Recommendations 
5.32 Use the updated International 
Diabetes Federation along with Diabe-
tes and Ramadan International Alliance 
comprehensive prefasting risk assess-
ment to generate a risk score for the 
safety of religious fasting. Provide 
fasting-focused education to minimize 
risks. B 
5.33 Assess and optimize treatment 
plan, dose, and timing for people with 
diabetes well in advance of religious 
fasting to reduce risk of hypoglycemia, 
dehydration, hyperglycemia, and/or 
ketoacidosis. B 
Although intermittent fasting and time-
restricted eating are speciﬁc dietary
strategies for energy restriction, religious 
fasting has been practiced for thousands 
of years and is part of many faith-based 
traditions. Duration, frequency, and type 
of fast vary among different religions 
(220). For example, Jewish people ab-
stain from any intake for ∼25 h during 
Yom Kippur (221,222). For Muslims, 
Ramadan fasting lasts for a full month, 
when abstinence from any food or drink 
is required from dawn to dusk (223). In-
dividuals with diabetes who fast have an 
increased risk for hypoglycemia, dehy-
dration, hyperglycemia, and ketoacidosis 
(224,225). 
Prefasting risk assessment is essential 
to increase level of safety (224,225). 
Various risk factors need to be consid-
ered for every individual wishing to fast. 
Some of these factors are related to the 
type of fast, type of diabetes, and/or 
the individual. Indeed, health care pro-
fessionals should inquire about any reli-
gious fasting for people with diabetes 
and provide education and support to 
accommodate their choice. The number 
of fasting days is an important factor to 
consider. In Ramadan fasting, a person 
fasts from dawn to dusk for a lunar 
month (29–30 days). It is important for 
 the health care professional to compre-
hensively assess these risk factors well 
in advance of the planned fasting date, 
as some of them are modiﬁable. Some 
of these factors are related to the na-
ture of the fasting practice, others are 
related to diabetes, and others might 
be due to individual factors such as the 
physical intensity of their work and/or 
the nutrition choices when they break 
their fast. The International Diabetes Fed-
eration along with Diabetes and Ramadan 
International Alliance adopted a risk calcu-
lator for the various risk factors (224,226). 
Several clinical studies from different 
countries have been published that assess 
the validity of the fasting risk score and 
the ease of use of it (226–229). The accu-
mulation of these risk factors provides 
a risk score as low, moderate, or high 
(Table 5.3) (224). W
 hile t he r isks o f d if-
ferent religious fasting practices may vary, 
this risk calculator provides some useful 
guidance for other types of religious 
fasting. 
Prefasting education regarding the im-
portance of increasing the frequency of 
glucose monitoring for people wishing to 
fast is very important. Timing of glucose 
monitoring is also especially important, 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S101 
Table 5.3—Elements for risk calculation and suggested risk score for people 
with diabetes who seek to fast during Ramadan 
Fasting risk element 
Risk score 
1. Pregnancy with any type of diabetes 
• Yes 
6.5 
2. Diabetes type 
• Type 1 diabetes or LADA 
1 
• Type 2 diabetes or any other type of diabetes 
0 
3. Duration of diabetes (years) 
• >20 years 
1 
• 10–20 years 
0.5 
• <10 years 
0 
4. Type of diabetes treatment (select all that are relevant) 
• Multiple daily premixed insulin injections 
2 
• Once-daily premixed insulin 
1.5 
• Open-loop insulin pump 
1.5 
• Automated insulin delivery system 
1 
• Standard basal insulin (NPH, detemir, or glargine 100) 
1 
• Ultra-long-acting basal insulin (glargine 300 or degludec) 
0.75 
• Short-acting insulin 
0.75 
• Glibenclamide or glipizide 
0.75 
• Modern sulfonylurea (gliclazide, gliclazide MR, glimepride) or repeglanide 
0.5 
• ≥2 glucose-lowering medications excluding insulin or sulfonylurea 
0.25 
• Nutrition modiﬁcation only or monotherapy (excluding insulin or sulfonylurea) 
0 
5. Presence of hypoglycemia 
• Impaired hypoglycemia awareness 
6.5 
• Severe* hypoglycemia during last 4 weeks 
5 
• Hypoglycemia more than once daily 
4 
• 6–7 episodes of hypoglycemia/week 
3 
• 3–5 episodes of hypoglycemia/week 
2 
• 1–2 episodes of hypoglycemia/week 
1 
• Hypoglycemia <1 time per week 
0.5 
• No hypoglycemia in last 4 weeks 
0 
6. Level of A1C 
• >9% (>75 mmol/mol) 
1 
• 7.5–9% (58–75 mmol/mol) 
0.5 
• <7.5% (<58 mmol/mol) 
0 
7. Glucose monitoring 
• Not done 
2 
• Done suboptimally 
1 
• Done as indicated 
0 
• Any type of CGM 
−0.5 
8. Hyperglycemic emergencies 
• DKA or HHS in the last month 
3.5 
• DKA or HHS in last 2–3 months 
2 
• DKA or HHS in last 4–6 months 
1 
• No DKA or HHS in last 6 months 
0 
9. Macrovascular** complications 
• Unstable macrovascular disease 
6.5 
• Stable macrovascular disease 
2 
• No macrovascular disease 
0 
10. Microvascular complications 
a. Nephropathy 
• eGFR <30 mL/min 
6.5 
• eGFR 30–45 mL/min 
4 
• eGFR 45–60 mL/min 
2 
• eGFR >60 mL/min 
0 
b. Neuropathy, foot complications, or diabetic retinopathy 
• 3 microvascular complications 
3 
• 2 microvascular complications 
2 
• 1 microvascular complication 
1 
• 0 microvascular complications 
0 
Continued on p. S102 
as the last few hours of fasting are fre-
quently associated with approximately 50% 
of hypoglycemic events (230). Conse-
quently, avoiding intense physical activ-
ity during the last few hours of fasting 
seems to be a sensible approach. 
During religious fasting, some people 
change their nutrition habits and overin-
dulge after fasting concludes. In many 
communities, the meal consumed to break 
the fast is rich in carbohydrates and in-
cludes foods and beverages high in added 
sugars and fat (224). Indeed, in one re-
cent study 16.5% of people with type 2 
diabetes who fasted for Ramadan re-
ported high blood glucose of >300 mg/dL 
(>16.6 mmol/L) during fasting days (230). 
Individualized ﬂuid adjustment and meal 
advice should be provided with emphasis 
on higher intake of ﬁber and replacing 
added sugars with complex carbohydrates 
to minimize hypoglycemia and hyperglyce-
mia and emphasis on sustaining adequate 
daily ﬂuid intake (231). 
Treatment before and after fasting 
should be culturally sensitive and individu-
alized. Speciﬁc recommendations for dia-
betes management during religious fasting 
in different faiths are available (224,225). 
In general, for people planning to fast for 
long hours and multiple consecutive days, 
choice of treatment should prioritize drugs 
with low hypoglycemia risk. Hypoglycemia 
risk while fasting in people using insulin, 
sulfonylureas, and other insulin secreta-
gogues is higher than that for individuals 
treated with other types of diabetes medi-
cations (224). The safety of SGLT2 inhibi-
tors was assessed in several studies during 
Ramadan fasting. These studies did not 
show signiﬁcant change in kidney function, 
dehydration rates, or ketosis (232). Guide-
lines do not advise any change in SGLT2 in-
hibitor dose during fasting; however, they 
advise against initiating SGLT2 inhibitors 
close to the start of fasting days to avoid 
excessive thirst (224). Table 5.4 summa-
rizes the effect of fasting on different treat-
ment options and the possible change in 
doses or timing for people with diabetes. 
Technology could be an important tool 
to enhance safety during fasting. Several 
studies have investigated the use of mon-
itoring technology during Ramadan fast-
ing (e.g., ﬂash glucose monitoring and 
CGM) and conﬁrmed that these tools 
are able to support high-risk groups 
wishing to fast, especially if combined with 
Ramadan-focused education (232–234). 
Meanwhile, the use of insulin pumps 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Fasting risk element 
S102 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Table 5.3—Continued 
11. Cognitive function, frailty, and age 
• Impaired cognitive function 
6.5 
• Advanced frailty 
6.5 
• Mild to moderate frailty 
4 
• Age >70 years with no home support 
1 
• Normal cognitive function and no frailty 
0 
12. Physical labor 
• High intensity 
4 
• Moderate intensity 
2 
• Low intensity 
0 
13. Fasting-focused education 
• Yes 
0 
• No 
1 
14. Fasting hours 
• ≥16 h 
1 
• <16 h 
0 
Based on risk scoring, people with diabetes can be categorized as having: 
• Score 0–3.0: low risk, fasting is probably safe 
• Score 3.5–6.0: moderate risk, fasting safety is uncertain 
• Score >6.0: high risk, fasting is probably unsafe 
AID, automated insulin delivery; CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; DKA, diabetic ketoaci-
dosis; eGFR, estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate; HHS, hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state; 
LADA, latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (type 1 diabetes). *Hypoglycemia requiring as-
sistance for treatment. **Macrovascular disease includes cardiac, cerebral, or peripheral. 
Adapted from Hassanein et al. (224). 
has been associated with low rates of 
hypoglycemia during fasting in people 
with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes technol-
ogies should be considered as a useful 
adjunct to risk calculation and/or nutri-
tion planning and education during reli-
gious fasting for people with diabetes 
(224). 
Monitoring Nutrition Intake 
It is important to monitor for adequate 
nutritional intake to prevent nutrient deﬁ-
ciencies, especially in people with diabe-
tes who are seeking intentional weight 
loss. Health care professionals should advise 
a healthy, whole foods–based eating pattern 
with sufﬁcient micro- and macronutrients, 
protein, ﬁber, and ﬂuid intake alongside 
regular resistance training to maintain 
lean body mass and prevent nutritional 
deﬁciencies (235,236). Referral to an RDN 
is also important to optimize nutrition sta-
tus, especially if they have experience con-
ducting a nutrition-focused physical exam 
(235,237) (see section 8, “Obesity and 
Weight Management for the Preven-
tion and Treatment of Diabetes”). 
Food Insecurity and Access 
Food insecurity is a household-level eco-
nomic and social condition of limited or 
Risk score 
uncertain access to adequate food (238). 
In 2023, 13.5% of Americans were food 
insecure (238), and food insecurity affects 
16% of adults with diabetes compared 
with 9% of adults without diabetes (239). 
There is a complex bidirectional associ-
ation between food insecurity and co-
occurring diabetes. Food security screen-
ing should happen at all levels of the 
health care system. Any member of the 
health care team can screen for food 
insecurity using the Hunger Vital Sign. 
Households are considered at risk if they 
answer either or both of the following 
statements as “often true” or “sometimes 
true” (compared with “never true”) (240): 
• “Within the past 12 months, we wor-
ried whether our food would run out 
before we got money to buy more.” 
• “Within the past 12 months, the food 
we bought just didn’t last, and we 
didn’t have money to get more.” 
If screening is positive for food insecu-
rity, efforts should be made to refer to 
appropriate programs and resources. See 
section 1, “Improving Care and Promoting 
Health in Populations,” for more informa-
tion concerning the social determinants 
of health and related issues like food in-
security and access. 
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 
Recommendations 
5.34 Evaluate baseline physical activ-
ity and sedentary time for all people 
with diabetes and those at risk for 
diabetes. For people who do not 
meet activity guidelines, encourage an 
increase in physical activities above 
baseline with the goal of meeting ac-
tivity guidelines. B Counsel that pro-
longed sitting should be interrupted 
at least every 30 min for blood glu-
cose and other beneﬁts. C 
5.35 Counsel children and adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes C or type 2 di-
abetes B to engage in 60 min/day 
or more of moderate- or vigorous-in-
tensity aerobic activity, with muscle-
strengthening and bone-strengthen-
ing activities at least 3 days/week, 
and to limit the amount of time being 
spent sedentary, including recreational 
screen time. C 
5.36 Counsel most adults with type 1 
diabetes C and type 2 diabetes B to 
engage in 150 min or more of mod-
erate- to vigorous-intensity aerobic 
activity per week, spread over at least 
3  days/week, w ith n o more than  2 c on-
secutive days without activity. Shorter 
durations (minimum 75 min/week) of 
vigorous-intensity or interval training 
may be sufﬁcient for more physically 
ﬁt individuals. 
5.37 Counsel adults with type 1 diabe-
tes C and type 2 diabetes B to engage 
in 2–3 sessions/week of resistance ex-
ercise on nonconsecutive days. 
5.38 Counsel most older adults with 
diabetes to engage in ﬂexibility train-
ing and balance training 2–3 times/ 
week. C 
5.39 Counsel all people with diabe-
tes who are treated with obesity 
pharmacotherapy or metabolic sur-
gery that meeting physical activity 
recommendations, in particular mus-
cle-strengthening exercises, may be 
beneﬁcial for maintaining lean body 
mass. C 
Physical activity includes all movement 
that increases energy use, and exercise 
is a more speciﬁc form  of  physical a ctiv-
ity that is structured and designed to 
improve physical ﬁtness. Both physical 
activity and exercise demonstrate nu-
merous beneﬁts for people with and at 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S103 
risk for diabetes and are important for 
the diabetes management plan. Higher 
levels of total and leisure-time physical 
activity are associated with a lower risk 
of cardiovascular and overall mortality in 
people with diabetes (241,242). Leisure-
time activity may also help prevent type 2 
diabetes (243) and reduce A1C in those 
with diabetes (244). Moreover, data from 
the DPPOS noted that self-reported habit-
ual physical activity is positively associated 
with 6-min walking distance, which sug-
gests long-term beneﬁts of regular physical 
activity engagement (245). Exercise and 
physical activity have favorable effects on 
glycemia, cardiovascular risk factors, weight 
loss, body composition, mobility, mortality, 
psychosocial well-being, and physical func-
tion in people with diabetes (242,246–254). 
Table 5.4—Changes in medications during fasting 
Medication name 
Risk of hypoglycemia 
Timing 
Total daily dose 
Metformin, SGLT2 inhibitor, 
DPP-4 inhibitor, GLP-1 
receptor agonist, acarbose, 
or pioglitazone 
Low 
• If once daily, then take at main 
mealtime. 
• If twice daily, then split dose be-
tween the two meals. 
• If once weekly, no change of time. 
• No change 
New generation of sulfonylurea 
(glimepiride and gliclazide) 
Low to moderate 
• If once daily, then take at main 
mealtime. 
• If twice daily, then split dose be-
tween the two meals. 
• Reduce dose if glucose levels are 
within individualized goal range and if 
no hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia is 
present at baseline. 
Older generation of 
sulfonylurea (glyburide) 
Moderate to high 
• Take at time of main meal 
• Replace with newer-generation sulfo-
nylurea or reduce dose by 50%. 
Basal insulin 
Moderate to high 
• For longer-acting basal analogs 
(glargine 300 or degludec), no 
need to change timing. 
• For other basal insulins, take at 
beginning of breaking fast meal. 
• Choose the insulin with lower risk of 
hypoglycemia among the class. 
• Reduce dose by 25–35% if not well 
managed. 
Prandial insulin 
High 
• At mealtime 
• Reduce dose of insulin for the meal 
followed by fasting (35–50%). 
• For other meals, insulin dose should 
match carbohydrate intake. 
Mixed insulin and insulin 
coformulations 
High 
• If once daily, then take at main 
mealtime. 
• If twice daily, then split dose be-
tween the two meals 
• Reduce dose of insulin for the meal 
followed by fasting (35–50%). 
• For other meals, no change of dose. 
DPP-4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; SGLT2, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2. 
Given the beneﬁts of physical activity 
and exercise for people with diabetes, 
they should be recommended and pre-
scribed to all individuals who are at risk 
for or have diabetes as part of the diabe-
tes care plan, unless otherwise contrain-
dicated. Speciﬁc recommendations and 
precautions on the type of activity will 
vary by diabetes type, age, and presence 
of complications. Health care professionals 
should support people with diabetes to set 
stepwise goals toward meeting the recom-
mended exercise volume. As individuals 
intensify their exercise program, medi-
cal monitoring may be indicated to en-
sure safety and evaluate the effects on 
glycemic management. Exercise and ac-
tivity plans should be tailored to meet 
the speciﬁc needs of each individual (255), 
and different  strategies c an be u sed to i n-
crease engagement (256,257). Individuals 
with diabetes may experience obstacles to 
exercise, such as not having enough time 
or inadequate access to equipment or 
education for safe participation. The 
care team should help identify these 
obstacles and individualize approaches to 
improve long-term adoption of physical 
activity and exercise as a key part of the 
diabetes care plan. 
Furthermore, activity plans can be 
modiﬁed to best suit the ﬁtness level of 
the individual, which may vary due to 
ability level or complications. The plan 
might also need to be modiﬁed over time 
due to changes in health status, goals, or 
preferences or if the therapeutic response 
reaches a plateau. For this reason, individu-
als with diabetes beneﬁt from a t eam-
based approach, including working with 
an exercise physiologist, physical therapist, 
or personal trainer, among others, where 
available and affordable (258). The ADA 
position statement “Physical Activity/Exer-
cise and Diabetes” reviews the evidence 
for the beneﬁts of exercise in people with 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes and offers 
more speciﬁc guidance (255). 
Physical Activity and Glycemic 
Management 
In people with type 2 diabetes, exercise 
training has demonstrated multiple cardio-
metabolic improvements, including but not 
limited to improved glycemia, cardiovascu-
lar function, and lipid proﬁles (259,260). A 
meta-analysis primarily consisting of aero-
bic training studies revealed that structured 
exercise interventions of at least 8 weeks 
have been shown to lower A1C by 0.66% in 
people with type 2 diabetes, even without 
a signiﬁcant change in BMI (247). Data also 
suggest that combining aerobic and resis-
tance exercise may provide greater glyce-
mic beneﬁts compared with performing 
either mode of exercise alone (260). 
In people with type 1 diabetes, the 
data for improving A1C are somewhat un-
clear (261,262). Interestingly, adding re-
sistance training to an exercise plan for 
adults with type 1 diabetes who were 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S104 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
already aerobically active did not impact 
glycemia, even with improvements in waist 
circumference and strength (263). Real-
world data from the Type 1 Diabetes and 
Exercise Initiative (T1DEXI) show that aer-
obic exercise reduces glycemia after an 
acute exercise session compared with 
high-intensity interval exercise and resis-
tance exercise; however, all three modes 
of exercise improve time in range over a 
24-h period (264). Furthermore, meeting 
daily step count of ∼7,000–10,000 steps/ 
day may support marginal improvements 
in time in range and reduced insulin re-
quirements (265). Though there may be 
some beneﬁts in glycemic response to ex-
ercise, this variability should be taken into 
consideration when recommending the 
type, intensity, and duration of exercise 
and insulin adjustments for a given indi-
vidual with type 1 diabetes to prevent hy-
poglycemia and hyperglycemia (266,267). 
Individuals of childbearing potential 
with preexisting diabetes, particularly 
type 2 diabetes, and those at risk for or 
presenting with gestational diabetes mel-
litus should be encouraged to engage in 
regular moderate-intensity physical activ-
ity prior to and during their pregnancies, 
as tolerated (255). Regular exercise can re-
duce the odds of developing gestational di-
abetes mellitus by nearly 40% (268), and 
acute and long-term prenatal exercise can 
positively impact glycemia, with a larger 
effect noted in people with diabetes (269). 
For more information, see section 15, 
“Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy.” 
Evaluating Pre-exercise Risk and 
Baseline Physical Activity 
As discussed more fully in section 10, 
“Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Manage-
ment,” the best protocol for assessing 
asymptomatic people with diabetes for 
coronary artery disease remains unclear. 
The ADA consensus report “Screening for 
Coronary Artery Disease in Patients With 
Diabetes” (270) concluded that routine 
testing is not recommended. However, 
health care professionals should perform 
a careful history prior to exercise engage-
ment, assess cardiovascular risk factors, 
be aware of the atypical presentation of 
coronary artery disease, such as a recently 
reported or measured decrease in exercise 
tolerance, and determine if testing for car-
diac abnormality (e.g., arrhythmia) is war-
ranted. Certainly, those with high risk 
should be encouraged to start with short 
periods of low-intensity exercise and 
slowly increase the duration and intensity 
as tolerated. Additionally, individuals with 
complications may warrant a more thor-
ough evaluation prior to engaging in a 
physical activity or exercise plan to ensure 
the plan is safe and appropriate. Health 
care professionals should assess for condi-
tions that might contraindicate certain 
types of exercise or predispose to injury, 
such as inadequately managed hyperten-
sion, untreated proliferative retinopathy, 
autonomic neuropathy, orthostatic hypo-
tension, peripheral neuropathy, balance 
impairment, and a history of foot ulcers or 
Charcot foot. 
An evaluation of baseline physical ac-
tivity and time spent in sedentary behav-
ior is recommended to help guide initial 
increases in physical activity levels. When 
discussing physical activity, health care 
professionals should consider inquiring 
about motivators (e.g., health beneﬁts, 
enjoyable activities with family) and po-
tential barriers (e.g., lack of time, fear of 
hypoglycemia, no safe place to perform 
activity) to exercise and activity participa-
tion (271,272). Understanding these bar-
riers may help with devising practical 
solutions for sustainable exercise partici-
pation, as complete uptake of the recom-
mended t otal e xercise volume may b e
initially challenging for some people with 
diabetes (273,274). People who do not 
meet activity guidelines should be encour-
aged to increase physical activity levels 
above baseline by performing activities 
such as walking, yoga, housework, garden-
ing, swimming, and dancing (275). Seden-
tary behaviors (e.g., time seated at work, 
on a computer, tablet, smartphone, or 
watching television) should be discussed 
regularly. People with diabetes should be 
counseled to reduce sedentary time and 
break up sedentary activities at least every 
30 min by brieﬂy standing, walking, or per-
forming other light physical activities to 
support glycemic and other cardiometa-
bolic beneﬁts, such as vascular function 
(276–279). 
Exercise for Children and Adolescents 
Similar to children and adolescents in 
general, children and adolescents with 
diabetes or who are at risk for diabetes 
should be encouraged to engage in regu-
lar physical activity, including at least 
60 min of moderate-to-vigorous aerobic 
activity every day and muscle- and bone-
strengthening activities at least 3 days per 
week to support development and health 
beneﬁts (254,280). Exercise programs pro-
moting nutrition modiﬁcation, increasing 
physical activity levels, and reducing sed-
entary time in children and adolescents at 
risk for type 2 diabetes have been shown 
to reduce risk of type 2 diabetes develop-
ment (281–283), and vigorous-intensity 
physical activity participation is associ-
ated with lower CVD risk in youth with 
type 2 diabetes (284). In general, chil-
dren and adolescents with type 1 diabe-
tes beneﬁt from being physically active, 
with meta-analyses reporting signiﬁcant 
associations between physical activity 
and lower A1C (285) and an absolute 
A1C reduction of nearly 0.8% (286). Thus, 
an active lifestyle should be recom-
mended to all children and adolescents 
with diabetes to support health out-
comes and health-related quality of life 
(287,288). Children and adolescents are 
recommended to limit sedentary time, 
including recreational screen time, to less 
than 2 h per day (289–291). See section 14, 
“Children and Adolescents,” for details. 
Frequency and Type of Physical 
Activity 
A comprehensive physical activity and ex-
ercise plan should encompass multiple 
modes of activities, including aerobic, re-
sistance, ﬂexibility, balance, and leisure-
time activities. Each activity type offers 
unique beneﬁts for diabetes management, 
overall health, and quality of life. Age, pre-
vious physical activity experiences, ﬁtness 
level, and goals should be considered 
when discussing physical activity and ex-
ercise plans. For more speciﬁc guidance, 
see the ADA position statement “Physical 
Activity/Exercise and Diabetes” (255). 
 
Aerobic Activity 
Aerobic activities encompass prolonged 
rhythmic activities using large muscle 
groups, such as walking, running, and cy-
cling (255), and provide multiple cardiome-
tabolic beneﬁts for people with diabetes 
(241,247,259,260,292). Adults with diabe-
tes are encouraged to engage in 150 min 
or more of moderate- to vigorous-inten-
sity aerobic activity weekly (254,255). Aer-
obic activity bouts should last at least 10 
min, with the goal of ∼30 min/day or 
more most days of the week to accumu-
late at least 150 min per week (e.g., 30 
min/day, 5 days per week). Daily exercise, 
or at least not allowing more than 2 days 
to elapse between exercise sessions, is rec-
ommended to decrease insulin resistance, 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S105 
regardless of diabetes type (293,294). 
Over time, aerobic activities should 
progress in intensity, frequency, and/or 
duration to meet the recommended 
exercise volume. Though exercise at 
higher intensities can facilitate greater 
reductions in A1C (295), many adults 
may be unable or unwilling to participate 
in high-intensity exercise. In those cases, di-
abetes care professionals should encour-
age engagement in moderate exercise for 
the recommended duration for A1C re-
duction and other cardiometabolic bene-
ﬁts (241,259,292). 
Resistance Activity 
Resistance activity refers to movements 
working against an external force for the 
purpose of improving skeletal muscle 
strength and size, which typically includes 
free weight, weight machine, body weight, 
or resistance band movements to target 
the major muscle groups. Resistance train-
ing can improve glycemia, strength, hy-
pertrophy, bone mineral density, and 
cardiometabolic health (296–298), and 
higher relative muscle mass is associated 
with better insulin sensitivity and lower 
diabetes risk (298). Adults with diabetes 
are encouraged t o participate  in 2 –3 ses-
sions/week of resistance exercise on non-
consecutive days (254,255). Although it 
has been suggested that high-intensity 
resistance exercise training provides a 
greater beneﬁt for glycemic management 
when compared with lower intensities 
(299), resistance training of any intensity 
is recommended to improve strength, 
balance, and the ability to engage in activi-
ties of daily living throughout the lifespan. 
Flexibility and Balance Activities 
Flexibility and balance activities serve to 
improve the range of motion around joints 
and reduce the risk of falls, respectively 
(254,255). Older adults with diabetes are 
encouraged to participate in ﬂexibility and 
balance training 2–3 times/week. A variety 
of activities, including yoga, tai chi, and re-
sistance training, can signiﬁcantly improve 
A1C, ﬂexibility, muscle strength, balance, 
and gait (254,300–304). Older adults in 
particular can beneﬁt from ﬂ exibility and 
resistance training for maintenance of 
range of motion, strength, and balance 
(255,305,306) (Fig. 5.2). 
High-Intensity Interval Training 
High-intensity interval training (HIIT) involves 
short bursts of aerobic training performed 
between 65% and 90% VO2peak (a measure 
of maximal aerobic capacity) or 75% and 
95% heart rate peak for 10 s to 4 min with 
12 s t o 5 m in o f active or p assive  recov-
ery. HIIT is a potentially time-efﬁcient mo-
dality that can elicit signiﬁcant physiologic 
and metabolic adaptations for individuals 
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes, including 
improvements in glycemia, β-cell func-
tion, central adiposity, and cardiac func-
tion (307–310). 
When matched for energy expenditure, 
a 4-month HIIT-style walking program pro-
vided greater improvement in glycemia, 
physical ﬁtness, and body composition 
compared with a continuous-walking pro-
gram in people with type 2 diabetes (311). 
In contrast, a 12-week study in people with 
type 2 diabetes noted that HIIT cycling and 
continuous cycling programs, matched for 
energy expenditure, were not different in 
efﬁcacy compared with each other or with 
a nonexercise control group (312). Both 
cycling protocols demonstrated improve-
ments in aerobic capacity and A1C com-
pared with baseline, but only continuous 
cycling showed improvements in cardio-
vascular response and visceral adiposity 
compared with baseline (312). 
Because an acute bout of HIIT can lead 
to transient increases in postexercise hy-
perglycemia, individuals with type 1 dia-
betes may need to use bolus correction 
(313) and individuals with type 2 diabetes 
are encouraged to monitor blood glucose 
when starting HIIT (314). In type 1 diabe-
tes, weeks of HIIT reduce A1C and insulin 
requirements and improve cardiometabolic 
risk proﬁles (310). Variability in glucose may 
occur w ith an increased r isk i n d elayed hy-
poglycemia, so careful monitoring of glu-
cose during and after HIIT is advised (310). 
Though  HIIT m ay b e an  attractive mode of
activity due to lowered required time com-
mitment, individuals may be unable or un-
willing to participate in activity at a high 
intensity. It may be of interest to intersperse 
HIIT within the broader activity plan with 
considerations for adequate recovery to pre-
vent potential exercise-related injury (293). 
Other Considerations 
Exercise During Obesity Treatment 
As many people with diabetes and obesity 
are often treated with obesity pharmaco-
therapy or metabolic surgery, additional 
emphasis on meeting physical activity 
guidelines, particularly muscle-strengthening 
activities, is warranted. Both obesity phar-
macotherapy and metabolic surgery lead 
 
to reductions in body weight, which often 
induces loss of both fat mass (adipose tis-
sue) and fat-free mass (nonadipose tis-
sues). This has raised concern about the 
loss of fat-free mass (particularly skeletal 
muscle and bone) and its potential long-
term consequences on strength, physical 
function, resting energy expenditure, and 
the potential development or worsening 
of frailty, sarcopenia, and sarcopenic obe-
sity. Engagement in exercise programs prior 
to and after metabolic surgery may sup-
port muscle mass and strength (315,316), 
reduce weight recurrence and promote 
better weight maintenance (317,318), and 
improve insulin sensitivity (319). Even mod-
est increases in physical activity after meta-
bolic surgery may contribute to greater fat 
mass loss and better retention of skeletal 
muscle mass (320). Though aerobic exer-
cise may be beneﬁcial, combined aerobic 
and resistance training may produce greater 
weight loss and better improvements in 
functional capacity, muscle mass, and 
strength compared with aerobic exercise 
alone (316). In addition to metabolic sur-
gery, combining obesity pharmacother-
apy with exercise programs may lead to 
some synergistic beneﬁts. Combination of 
structured exercise training plus a GLP-1 
RA has demonstrated improvements in 
β-cell function, glucose tolerance, and in-
sulin sensitivity (321,322), reductions in 
abdominal adiposity and inﬂammation 
(323), and more favorable effects on 
body composition such as fat mass loss, 
fat-free mass maintenance, and reduced 
waist circumference (321–324). Conversely, 
a 16-week RCT reported that combined ex-
ercise training and GLP-1 RA therapy did 
not show synergistic beneﬁts on cardiac 
function but rather showed potential in-
hibitory effects on left ventricular diastolic 
function in people with type 2 diabetes 
(325). However, this was a predeﬁned sub-
study that was not designed to detect 
changes in myocardial function. As data in 
this area for people with diabetes are 
emerging, more studies of longer duration 
and with newer-generation medications 
are needed. 
Hypoglycemia 
For individuals taking insulin and/or insulin 
secretagogues, physical activity may cause 
hypoglycemia if the medication dose or 
carbohydrate consumption is not adjusted 
for the exercise session and postbout ef-
fect on glucose. Individuals on these thera-
pies may need to ingest carbohydrates if 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S106 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Importance of 24-hour physical behaviors for type 2 diabetes 
SITTING/BREAKING UP PROLONGED SITTING 
SWEATING (MODERATE-TO-VIGOROUS ACTIVITY) 
24 HOURS 
• 
activity (i.e., uses large muscle groups, rhythmic in 
consecutive days of inactivity. Supplement 
with two to three resistance, flexibility, 
and/or balance sessions. 
•   As little as 30 min/week of 
moderate-intensity physical activity 
improves metabolic profiles. 
Physical function/ 
frailty/sarcopenia 
•  The frailty 
phenotype in type 2 
diabetes is unique, 
often encompassing 
obesity alongside 
physical frailty, at 
an earlier age. The 
ability of people with 
type 2 diabetes to 
undertake simple 
functional exercises 
in middle-age is 
similar to that in those 
over a decade older. 
SLEEP 
Aim for consistent, 
uninterrupted sleep, 
even on weekends. 
Quantity - Long 
durations negatively 
impact A1C. 
Quality - Irregular sleep 
results in poorer glycemic 
levels, likely influenced by the 
increased prevalence of insomnia, 
obstructive sleep apnea, and restless 
leg syndrome in people with type 2 diabetes. 
Chronotype - Evening chronotypes (i.e., night owl: go to bed 
late and get up late) may be more susceptible to inactivity 
and poorer glycemic levels than morning chronotypes (i.e., 
early bird: go to bed early and get up early). 
SLEEP QUALITY 
CHRONOTYPE 
SLEEP QUANTITY 
STRENGTHENING 
SWEATING 
PHYSICAL 
FUNCTION 
SITTING/BREAKING 
UP PROLONGED 
SITTING 
STEPPING 
STEPPING 
• 
An increase of only 
500 steps/day is 
associated with 
of cardiovascular 
morbidity and all-
cause mortality. 
• 
brisk-intensity 
walk per day 
years' greater life 
expectancy. 
STRENGTHENING 
Resistance exercise (i.e., any 
activity that uses the person's 
own body weight or works against 
a resistance) also improves insulin 
sensitivity and glucose levels; activities 
like tai chi and yoga also encompass 
elements of flexibility and balance. 
• 
Limit sitting. Breaking up prolonged sitting (at least every 30 min) 
with short regular bouts of slow walking or simple resistance 
exercises can improve glucose metabolism. 
Encourage ≥150 min/week of moderate-intensity physical 
nature) OR ≥75 min/week vigorous-intensity activity 
spread over ≥3 days/week, with no more than 2 
2-9% decreased risk 
A 5- to 6-min 
equates to ~4 
(>8 h) and short 
(<6 h) sleep 
Glucose/ 
insulin 
Blood 
pressure 
A1C 
Lipids 
Physical 
function 
Depression 
Quality 
of life 
SITTING/BREAKING UP PROLONGED SITTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STEPPING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STRENGTHENING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADEQUATE SLEEP DURATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOOD SLEEP QUALITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHRONOTYPE/CONSISTENT TIMING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SWEATING (MODERATE-TO-VIGOROUS ACTIVITY) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
IMPACT OF PHYSICAL BEHAVIORS ON CARDIOMETABOLIC HEALTH IN PEOPLE WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES 
 Higher levels of improvement (physical function, quality of life)  Lower levels of improvement (glucose/insulin, blood pressure, A1C, lipids, depression) 
 No data available 
 Green arrows = strong evidence  Yellow arrows = medium-strength evidence  Red arrows = limited evidence 
Figure 5.2—Importance of 24-h physical behaviors for type 2 diabetes. Adapted from Davies et al. (633). 
pre-exercise glucose levels are <90 mg/dL 
(<5.0 mmol/L), depending on whether 
they are able to lower insulin doses during 
the workout (such as with an insulin pump 
or reduced pre-exercise insulin dosage), 
the time of day exercise is done, and the 
intensity and duration of the activity (267). 
Due to heterogeneity of glycemic responses 
to physical activity, the approach to 
carbohydrate intake and medication ad-
justments around the activity or exercise 
session should be individualized. More 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S107 
guidance on carbohydrate intake and medi-
cation considerations can be found in the 
ADA position statement “Physical Activity/ 
Exercise and Diabetes” (255). In some peo-
ple with diabetes, hypoglycemia after exer-
cise may occur and last for several hours 
due to increased insulin sensitivity. Hypo-
glycemia is not common in those who are 
not treated with insulin or insulin secreta-
gogues, and no routine preventive meas-
ures for hypoglycemia are usually advised 
in these cases. Intense activities, such as 
HIIT, may actually raise glucose levels in-
stead of lowering them, especially if pre-
exercise glucose is elevated (267). Because 
of v ariation in glycemic r esponse t o e xer-
cise, people with diabetes should be taught 
to check blood glucose levels and/or moni-
tor CGM values during and after exercise, 
how to understand the effect of exercise on 
glucose, about the potential prolonged ef-
fects (depending on intensity and duration), 
and how to manage and use AID technol-
ogy around and during the time of exercise 
(266,326). See section 6, “Glycemic Goals, 
Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises,” 
for more information on hypoglycemia pre-
vention and management. 
Exercise in the Presence of Complications 
See section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease 
and Risk Management,” and section 12, 
“Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and Foot Care,” 
for more information on these long-term 
complications. A meta-analysis demon-
strated that high versus low levels of phys-
ical activity were associated with lower 
CVD incidence and mortality (summary 
risk ratio 0.84 [95% CI 0.77–0.92], n = 7,
and 0.62 [0.55–0.69], n = 11) and fewer mi-
crovascular complications (0.76 [0.67–0.86], 
n = 8). Dose-response meta-analyses 
showed that physical activity was associated 
with lower risk of diabetes-related complica-
tions even at lower activity levels (327). 
Retinopathy 
If proliferative diabetic retinopathy or se-
vere nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy 
is present, then vigorous-intensity aerobic 
or resistance exercise may be contraindi-
cated because of the risk of triggering vit-
reous hemorrhage or retinal detachment 
(328). Consultation with an ophthalmolo-
gist prior to engaging in an intense exer-
cise plan may be appropriate. 
Peripheral Neuropathy 
Decreased pain sensation and a higher 
pain threshold in the extremities can result 
 
in an increased risk of skin breakdown, in-
fection, and Charcot joint destruction with 
some forms of exercise. Therefore, a thor-
ough assessment should be done to ensure 
that neuropathy does not alter kinesthetic 
or proprioceptive sensation during physical 
activity, particularly in those with more 
severe neuropathy. Moderate-intensity 
walking  may  not l ead to a n increased  risk o f  
foot ulcers or reulceration in those with pe-
ripheral neuropathy who use proper foot-
wear (329,330). In addition, 150 min/week 
of moderate exercise improved outcomes 
in people with prediabetic neuropathy 
(331). All individuals with peripheral neu-
ropathy should wear proper footwear and 
examine their feet daily to detect lesions 
early. Anyone with a foot injury or open 
sore should be restricted to non–weight-
bearing activities. 
Autonomic Neuropathy 
Autonomic neuropathy can increase the 
risk of exercise-induced injury or adverse 
events through decreased cardiac respon-
siveness to exercise, postural hypotension, 
impaired thermoregulation, impaired night 
vision due to impaired papillary reaction, 
and greater susceptibility to hypoglycemia 
(332). Cardiovascular autonomic neurop-
athy is also an independent risk factor 
for cardiovascular death and silent myocar-
dial ischemia (333). Therefore, individuals 
with diabetic autonomic neuropathy should 
undergo cardiac investigation before begin-
ning physical activity more intense than 
that to which they are accustomed. 
Chronic Kidney Disease 
Physical activity can acutely increase uri-
nary albumin excretion. However, there is 
no evidence that vigorous-intensity exer-
cise accelerates the rate of progression of 
CKD, and there appears to be no need for 
speciﬁc exercise restrictions for people 
with CKD in general (328). 
SMOKING CESSATION: TOBACCO, 
E-CIGARETTES, AND CANNABIS 
Recommendations 
5.40 Ask people with diabetes routinely 
about the use of tobacco or vape prod-
ucts. A Advise complete avoidance of 
tobacco and vaping. A For individuals 
who use t hese products,  provide  or r e-
fer for combination treatment consist-
ing of tobacco and/or vape product(s) 
cessation counseling and pharmaco-
logic therapy. A 
5.41 Advise people with type 1 diabe-
tes C and those with other forms of 
diabetes at risk for diabetic ketoacido-
sis not to use recreational cannabis in 
any form. E 
A causal link between cigarette smoking 
and diabetes has been well established 
for over a decade (334). Results from epi-
demiologic, case-control, and cohort stud-
ies support the causal link between 
cigarette smoking and multiple health risks 
that profoundly affect the morbidity and 
mortality of people with diabetes (334). 
People with diabetes who smoke and are 
exposed to second-hand smoke have a 
heightened risk of macrovascular compli-
cations (e.g., cardiovascular and peripheral 
vascular disease), microvascular complica-
tions (e.g., kidney disease and visual im-
pairment), elevated A1C, and premature 
death compared with those who do not 
smoke and are not exposed to second-
hand smoke (335,336). Findings from a 
systematic review and meta-analysis show 
a dose-response relation for current smok-
ing and the risk for type 2 diabetes; this 
risk decreases as the time since quitting 
increases (337). 
Routine (every visit with every person), 
thorough assessment of all types of to-
bacco use is essential to prevent tobacco 
product initiation and promote cessation. 
Evidence demonstrates quitting smoking 
reduces or reverses adverse health effects 
in addition to increasing life expectancy by 
up to 10 years (338). However, tobacco 
use among adults with chronic conditions 
remains higher than the general popula-
tion, despite recent declines in smoking 
among middle-aged and older adults with 
diabetes (339). Numerous RCTs demon-
strate the efﬁcacy and cost-effectiveness 
of both intensive and brief counseling on 
smoking cessation, including the use of 
telephone quit lines and web-based inter-
ventions, in reducing tobacco use and main-
taining abstinence from smoking (338,340). 
The World Health Organization recom-
mends both counseling and pharma-
cologic therapy to assist with smoking 
cessation in nonpregnant adults (
). A 
secondary data analysis of the Evaluating 
Adverse Events in a Global Smoking Cessa-
tion Study (EAGLES), a randomized, double-
blind, triple-dummy, placebo-controlled and 
active-controlled trial, found varenicline 
to be the most efﬁcacious pharmacother-
apy for people with diabetes compared 
341
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S108 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
with placebo (342). These ﬁndings sup-
port the American Thoracic Society 2020 
guideline recommending varenicline as a 
ﬁrst-line pharmacotherapy for tobacco de-
pendence (343). However, despite the ef-
fectiveness of pharmacologic therapy and 
counseling, more than two-thirds of people 
trying to quit do not receive treatment fol-
lowing evidence-based guidelines (338). 
Weight gain after smoking cessation is a 
concern for diabetes management and 
risk for new onset of disease (344). While 
postcessation weight gain is an identiﬁed 
issue, studies have found that an average 
weight gain of 3–5 kg does n ot n ecessarily  
persist long term or diminish the substan-
tial cardiovascular beneﬁt realized from 
smoking cessation (337). A systematic re-
view and meta-analysis comparing those 
who quit smoking to those who smoke 
stratiﬁed by postcessation weight gain 
found smoking cessation lowered the risk 
of CVD and all-cause mortality regardless 
of postcessation weight gain (345). An-
other systematic review and meta-analysis 
of interventions to prevent weight gain 
following smoking cessation identiﬁed sev-
eral approaches that may modestly reduce 
weight gain, including personalized weight 
management programs, exercise programs, 
nicotine replacement therapy, and ﬂuoxe-
tine (346). Emerging research suggests GLP-
1 RAs may improve smoking cessation, re-
duce cravings and withdrawal symptoms, 
and decrease weight gain in adults with 
overweight and/or prediabetes (347). More 
clinical trials are needed to examine the ef-
ﬁcacy of GLP-1 RAs and other incretin phar-
macotherapies as a possible treatment 
for tobacco use disorders and preventing 
weight gain postcessation. 
In recent years, there has been an in-
crease in the use and availability of multi-
ple noncigarette nicotine products. The 
impact of these products on diabetes is 
less well established than that of combusti-
ble cigarettes. Smokeless tobacco products, 
such as dip and chew, pose an increased 
risk for CVD and oral cancer (348,349).Vap-
ing with e-cigarettes and related devices 
has become more popular due to percep-
tions that e-cigarette use is less harmful 
than combustible cigarettes (350). While 
combustible tobacco products are the 
most harmful, e-cigarettes pose signiﬁ-
cant health risks to the cardiovascular 
and respiratory systems (351,352). Find-
ings from the Population Assessment of 
Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study sug-
gest e-cigarettes contribute to nicotine 
dependence, conﬁrming that there is no 
safe tobacco product (353,354). Individ-
uals with diabetes should be advised to 
avoid vaping and using e-cigarettes, either 
as an approach to stop smoking combusti-
ble cigarettes or as a recreational drug. If 
people are using e-cigarettes for cessation, 
they should be advised to avoid using both 
combustible and electronic cigarettes, and 
if only using only e-cigarettes, they should 
be advised to discontinue those too (340). 
Diabetes education programs provide an 
opportunity to systematically reach and en-
gage individuals with diabetes in smoking 
cessation efforts. A cluster randomized trial 
demonstrated statistically signiﬁcant in-
creases in quit rates and long-term absti-
nence rates (>6 months) when cessation 
interventions were delivered through dia-
betes education clinics, regardless of mo-
tivation to quit at baseline (355). 
Increased legalization and multiple for-
mulations of c annabis products have  re-
sulted in increased prevalence in the use of 
these products in all age-groups (356,357). 
Cannabidiol (CBD), which in its pure form 
has no psychoactive effect, has received 
attention for its potential therapeutic 
beneﬁts in diabetes management. How-
ever, research shows no noticeable effect 
on glucose or insulin levels in adults with 
type 2 diabetes who use CBD (358). Sig-
niﬁcant increases in tetrahydrocannabinol 
(THC) concentrations in CBD products 
and use of additional psychoactive canna-
binoid products, such as delta-8 THC, are 
of speciﬁc concern (359). Most of these 
products are currently unregulated by the 
FDA, and public health warnings regard-
ing use have been issued (360). The FDA 
reports adverse effects related to delta-
8 THC, some of which may have health 
implications for people with diabetes 
(e.g., vomiting) (360). Evidence of speciﬁc 
increased risk of hyperglycemic ketosis 
associated with cannabis use has been 
reported in adults with type 1 diabetes 
(361–363). Hyperglycemic ketosis in indi-
viduals with type 1 diabetes using cannabis 
is associated with cannabis hyperemesis 
syndrome, which is marked by severe 
nausea, abdominal pain, and vomiting 
(361–363). Recommended diagnostic cri-
teria for hyperglycemic ketosis cannabis 
hyperemesis syndrome include a blood 
glucose of ≥250 mg/dL, an anion gap of 
>10, a serum β-hydroxybutyrate level of 
>0.6 mmol/L, a pH level of ≥7.4, and a 
bicarbonate level of ≥15 mmol/L (363). 
Health care professionals should consider 
hyperglycemic ketosis cannabis hyperem-
esis syndrome in people with type 1 dia-
betes with pH ≥7.4 and bicarbonate >15 
mmol/L in the presence of ketosis (363). 
The increased availability and use of 
tobacco and cannabis products highlights 
the importance of assessing use, educating 
individuals about the associated risks, and 
providing support for cessation. 
SUPPORTING POSITIVE HEALTH 
BEHAVIORS 
Given the impact on glycemic outcomes 
and risk for future complications (364,365), 
diabetes care professionals should support 
health-promoting behaviors (preventive, 
treatment, and maintenance), including 
glucose monitoring, taking medications, 
using diabetes technologies, engaging 
in physical activity, and healthy eating. 
Evidence-based behavioral strategies and 
multicomponent interventions, including 
motivational interviewing (366,367), activa-
tion (368), goal setting and action planning 
(367,369,370), problem-solving (8,369), 
tracking or self-monitoring health behav-
iors with or without feedback from a 
health care professional (367,369,370), 
and facilitating opportunities for social 
support (367,369,370), help people with 
diabetes and their caregivers develop 
health behavior routines and overcome 
barriers to self-management. While behav-
ioral economics approaches (e.g., ﬁnancial 
incentives, social norms messaging) show 
mixed results, they tend to enhance moti-
vation and demonstrate short-term (i.e., 
<6 months) b eneﬁts for behavior change 
(371). Multicomponent interventions are 
the most effective for improving behavior 
and glycemic outcomes (370,372), partic-
ularly in children and adolescents with 
diabetes, when delivered as family-based 
or multisystem behavioral interventions 
(373). Adapting and tailoring behavior 
change strategies to the characteristics 
and needs of individuals and populations 
is essential (374,375). These health be-
havior change strategies can be delivered 
by behavioral health professionals, certi-
ﬁed DCES, qualiﬁed community health 
workers (369), or other trained health 
care professionals (376,377). They can also 
be implemented via digital health tools 
(370,377,378). To deliver these strategies 
effectively, diabetes care professionals 
should receive training in evidence-based 
methods such as motivational interview-
ing (379). 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S109 
PSYCHOSOCIAL CARE 
Please refer to the ADA position state-
ment “Psychosocial Care for People With 
Diabetes” for a list of assessment tools 
and additional details (1) and the ADA 
Behavioral Health Toolkit for assessment 
questionnaires and surveys (professional 
.diabetes.org/meetings/behavioral-health-
toolkit). Throughout the Standards of 
Care, the broad term “behavioral health” 
is used to encompass both 1) health  be-
havior engagement and relevant factors 
and 2) behavioral health concerns and 
care related to living with diabetes. 
Psychosocial well-being is a critical 
component of diabetes care and self-
management. Psychosocial factors, in-
cluding environmental, social, family, 
behavioral, emotional, religious, and SDOH 
factors, inﬂuence living with diabetes and 
the ability to achieve optimal health out-
comes. People with diabetes and their 
families or caregivers face complex, mul-
tifaceted challenges integrating diabetes 
care into daily life (380). Clinically signiﬁ-
cant behavioral health diagnoses are con-
siderably more prevalent in people with 
diabetes than in those without diabetes 
(381,382). Psychological and social problems 
can interfere with a person’s (383 to 385to385) or 
family’s (385) ability to perform diabetes 
care tasks and negatively affect health 
status. Furthermore, these conditions are 
associated with reduced short-term (i.e., 
<6 months) glycemic stability and in-
creased mortality risk (382,386).Therefore, 
addressing both clinical and subclinical 
psychological symptoms is essential to 
comprehensive care. 
Diabetes health care professionals 
should routinely monitor and screen for 
psychosocial concerns in a timely and efﬁ-
cient manner and refer to appropriate 
services (387,388). Psychosocial care can 
be provided by various health care pro-
fessionals based on training, experience, 
need, and availability (377,389,390). Health 
care professionals can integrate brief, per-
son-centered psychosocial interventions 
into routine diabetes care by creating 
a supportive environment for emotional 
disclosure. Validating an individual’s ex-
periences, asking open-ended questions, 
and employing empathetic listening can 
foster trust and increase engagement in 
treatment decisions (391). Furthermore, 
health care professionals can implement 
brief counseling strategies to address psy-
chosocial concerns and promote adaptive 
coping, including motivational interview-
ing, collaborative goal setting, cognitive 
behavioral techniques to reframe negative 
thoughts, structured problem-solving, and 
emotion regulation strategies (8,366,367, 
369,370,392,393). Practical examples in-
clude using “importance” and “conﬁdence” 
rulers, conducting week-long behavioral ex-
periments within a cognitive behavioral 
therapy (CBT) framework, demonstrating 
breathing exercises to promote mindfulness, 
setting SMART goals to facilitate problem-
solving, and teaching grounding techniques 
to support emotion regulation. 
When psychosocial concerns cannot be 
addressed adequately in routine diabetes 
care, referral to a behavioral health pro-
fessional is necessary. Ideally, qualiﬁed 
behavioral health professionals with spe-
cialized training and experience in diabe-
tes should be integrated with or provide 
collaborative care as part of diabetes care 
teams (394,395). A behavioral health pro-
fessional should conduct a comprehensive 
assessment and deliver evidence-based 
treatment (396,397). 
Recommendations 
5.42 Provide psychosocial care to all 
people with diabetes as part of rou-
tine medical care delivered by trained 
health care professionals using a 
collaborative, person-centered, cul-
turally informed approach. A 
5.43 Implement screening protocols 
for psychosocial concerns, preferably 
using age-appropriate standardized 
and validated tools. Screen at least 
annually or when there is a change in 
health status, treatment, or life cir-
cumstances. C 
5.44 Refer to behavioral health pro-
fessionals or other trained health 
care professionals, ideally those with 
experience in diabetes, for further as-
sessment and treatment of psychoso-
cial concerns as indicated. B 
Screening 
Health care teams and clinical practices 
should develop and implement psychoso-
cial screening protocols to ensure routine 
monitoring of psychosocial well-being and 
to identify potential concerns among peo-
ple with diabetes, following published guid-
ance and recommendations (398,399). 
Topics to screen for may include, but are 
not limited to, attitudes about diabetes, 
expectations for treatment and outcomes 
(especially related to starting a new treat-
ment or technology), general and diabetes-
related mood, stress, and/or quality of life 
(e.g., diabetes distress, depressive symp-
toms, anxiety symptoms, and fear of hypo-
glycemia), available resources (ﬁnancial, 
social, family, and emotional), and/or psy-
chiatric history. Given elevated rates of 
suicidality among people with diabetes 
(400,401), screening for suicidality may 
also be appropriate (402–404). A list of 
age-appropriate screening and evalua-
tion measures is provided in the ADA po-
sition statement “Psychosocial Care for 
People with Diabetes” (1), and guidance 
has been published about selection of 
screening tools, clinical thresholds, and 
frequency of screening (405,406). 
Key opportunities for psychosocial
screening include diagnosis, routine visits, 
hospitalizations, new onset of complica-
tions, transitions in care (e.g., pediatric to 
adult care teams [407]), changes in medi-
cal treatment, and when problems with 
achieving A1C goals, quality of life, or self-
management arise. Additionally, changes 
in life circumstances and SDOH affect a 
person’s ability to self-manage their dia-
betes. Thus, screening for SDOH should 
also be incorporated into routine care 
(408). When caregivers or family mem-
bers play a signiﬁcant role in diabetes 
care, their psychosocial concerns should 
be assessed and addressed by appropri-
ate professionals (407,409). 
 
 
 
 
Standardized, validated, age-appropriate 
tools for psychosocial monitoring and 
screening can also be used (1). The ADA 
provides access to tools for screening 
speciﬁc psychosocial topics, such as dia-
betes distress, fear of hypoglycemia, and 
other relevant psychological symptoms, 
at professional.diabetes.org/sites/default/ 
ﬁles/media/ada_mental_health_toolkit_ 
questionnaires.pdf. Additional informa-
tion about developmentally speciﬁc psy-
chosocial screening topics is available in 
section 14, “Children and Adolescents,” 
and section 13, “Older Adults.” Health 
care professionals may also use informal 
verbal inquiries, for example, by asking 
whether there have been persistent changes 
in mood during the past 2 weeks or since 
the individual’s last appointment and 
whether the person can identify a trigger-
ing event or change in circumstances. Dia-
betes care professionals should also ask 
whether there are new or different bar-
riers to treatment and self-management, 
such as feeling overwhelmed or stressed 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S110 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
by having diabetes (see DIABETES DISTRESS, be-
low), changes in ﬁnances, or competing 
medical demands (e.g., the diagnosis of a 
co-occurring condition). 
Psychological Assessment and 
Treatment 
When psychosocial concerns are identi-
ﬁed and cannot be addressed adequately 
in routine diabetes care, referral to a qual-
iﬁed behavioral health professional, pref-
erably one specializing in diabetes, should 
be made for comprehensive evaluation, 
diagnosis, and treatment (377,396,397). 
Indications for referrals may include posi-
tive screening for diabetes distress, de-
pression, anxiety, disordered eating, or 
cognitive dysfunction (see Table 5.5 for a 
complete list). Incorporating psychosocial 
assessment and treatment into routine 
care is preferable to waiting for a speciﬁc 
problem or deterioration in glycemic or 
psychological status to occur (38,385). 
Health care professionals should identify 
and refer to behavioral health professio-
nals knowledgeable about diabetes and 
psychosocial care. The ADA provides a list 
of behavioral health professionals who 
have specialized expertise or who have re-
ceived education about psychosocial and 
behavioral issues related to diabetes in the 
ADA Mental Health Professional Directory 
(professional.diabetes.org/ada-mental-
health-provider-directory). Ideally, be-
havioral health professionals should be 
embedded in diabetes care settings. Given 
limited behavioral health resources, other 
trained health care professionals may also 
provide this specialized psychosocial care 
(389,394,410). Although some health care 
professionals may not feel qualiﬁed to 
treat psychosocial concerns (411), streng-
thening the relationship between a person 
with diabetes and the health care profes-
sional may increase referral acceptance. 
Collaborative care interventions and a 
team approach have demonstrated efﬁcacy 
in diabetes self-management, depression 
outcomes, and psychosocial functioning 
(6,7). The ADA provides resources for a 
range of health professionals to support 
behavioral health in people with diabetes 
at professional.diabetes.org/meetings/ 
behavioral-health-toolkit. 
Successful evidence-based approaches 
include cognitive behavioral (392,396,412) 
and mindfulness-based therapies (413). 
See the sections below for details about 
interventions for speciﬁc psychosocial con-
cerns. Behavioral interventions may also 
be indicated in a preventive manner even 
in the absence of positive psychosocial 
screeners, such as resilience-promoting in-
terventions to prevent diabetes distress 
in adolescence (414,415) and behavioral 
family interventions to promote collabo-
rative family diabetes management in 
early adolescence (416,417) or to support 
adjustment to a new treatment plan or 
technology (60). Psychosocial interven-
tions can be delivered via digital health 
platforms (418,419) or integrated into 
group-based or shared diabetes appoint-
ments that address both medical and psy-
chosocial concerns relevant to living with 
diabetes (390,420). 
Although psychosocial interventions have 
demonstrated short-term (i.e., <6 months)  
efﬁcacy, their success in sustained engage-
ment in health behaviors and improved gly-
cemic outcomes has varied. Thus, health 
care professionals should systematically 
monitor these outcomes to assess ongoing 
needs following implementation of current 
evidence-based psychosocial treatments. 
Diabetes Distress 
Recommendation 
5.45 Screen for diabetes distress at 
least annually in people with diabetes, 
caregivers, and family members, and 
repeat screening when treatment goals 
are not met, at transitional times, and/or 
in  the presence of d iabetes c omplica-
tions. Health care professionals should 
consider referral to a qualiﬁed behav-
ioral health professional, ideally one 
with experience in diabetes, for fur-
ther assessment and treatment if not 
adequately addressed during medical 
appointments. B 
Diabetes distress is common and refers 
to the emotional burdens and worries as-
sociated with living with and managing a 
demanding chronic condition (421,422). 
Diabetes distress is distinct from depres-
sion and anxiety and has unique relation-
ships with glycemia and other outcomes 
(423,424) (Tables 5.6 and 5.7). The con-
stant behavioral demands of diabetes 
self-management (taking medications, 
monitoring glucose levels, moderating 
food intake, and participating in physical 
activity) and the potential or actual dis-
ease progression are associated with in-
creased diabetes distress (425,426). In 
individuals with type 2 diabetes, prevalence 
rates of d iabetes distress e xceed  60%
(425,427), whereas in those with type 1 di-
abetes, rates surpass 70% (426). Parents 
of children and adolescents with type 1 di-
abetes also experience diabetes distress, 
which is associated with greater family 
conﬂict and reduced self-management be-
haviors (428). Among adults, diabetes dis-
tress negatively affects medication-taking 
behaviors and is linked to elevated A1C, 
lower self-efﬁcacy, and less optimal eating 
and exercise behaviors (429). In addition, 
diabetes distress frequently co-occurs with 
symptoms of anxiety, depression, and re-
duced health-related quality of life (430). 
Importantly, t he experience of s tigma re-
lated to living with diabetes may further 
exacerbate diabetes distress (431,432). 
Diabetes distress should be routinely 
monitored (433) using diabetes-speciﬁc 
validated measures appropriate for each 
person or population (e.g., age and diabe-
tes type) (1). Once diabetes distress is 
identiﬁed, it should be acknowledged and 
addressed (434). Addressing diabetes dis-
tress in routine diabetes care involves ini-
tiating a conversation about feelings and 
beliefs in a respectful, sensitive, and direct 
manner (421). In practice, this involves cre-
ating a space for emotional disclosure, vali-
dating the emotional aspects of diabetes, 
and linking emotions to self-management 
behaviors. Health care professionals can 
introduce brief coping strategies (e.g., 
values afﬁrmation, mindful breathing, 
cognitive reframing) and highlight past 
successes to reinforce resilience. When 
diabetes distress cannot be addressed 
in routine diabetes care, referral for follow-
up care is recommended (397), such as 
DSMES, to address distressing areas of dia-
betes management that may also be af-
fecting self-care; a behavioral intervention 
from a qualiﬁed behavioral health profes-
sional, ideally one with expertise in diabe-
tes; and/or an intervention from another 
trained health care professional (421). 
Several intervention strategies have 
been shown to reduce diabetes distress 
and, to a lesser degree, improve glycemic 
outcomes. These include educational, psy-
chological, and health behavior change 
approaches such as DSMES, CBT, mindful-
ness-based therapies, motivational inter-
viewing, and others (392,412,435–439). 
In addition, interventions delivered via tele-
phone, smartphone applications, video visits, 
and/or self-help modalities can be effective 
in reducing diabetes distress (416,440–442). 
DSMES has been shown to reduce diabe-
tes distress (
 
6,443) a nd m ay b eneﬁt A1C  
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S111 
when combined with peer support (444). 
Counseling about expected diabetes dis-
tress may be helpful in several contexts, 
including new diagnosis, changes in 
treatment, life context, presence of com-
plications, and other stressors (421). A 
multisite RCT with adults with type 1 
diabetes, elevated diabetes distress, and 
elevated A1C demonstrated clinically 
meaningful improvements in both out-
comes using a combination of group-
based diabetes self-management educa-
tion and emotion-focused skills (441). In 
adults with type 2 diabetes in the Veter-
ans Affairs system, an RCT found that in-
tegrating a single session of mindfulness 
into DSMES, followed by a booster session 
and mobile app practice over 24 weeks, 
signiﬁcantly reduced diabetes distress 
compared with DSMES alone (445). An 
RCT of CBT in adults with type 2 diabetes 
and elevated symptoms of distress or 
depression demonstrated improvements 
in diabetes distress, A1C, and depressive 
symptoms for up to 1 year (446). Another 
RCT among individuals with type 1 and 
type 2 diabetes found mindful self-compas-
sion training increased self-compassion, re-
duced depression and diabetes distress, 
and improved A1C (447). In teens with 
type 1 diabetes, an RCT of a resilience-
focused cognitive behavioral and social 
problem-solving intervention reduced di-
abetes distress and depressive symptoms 
for  up to  3  years  compared with diabetes  
education, although neither A1C nor self-
management behaviors improved over 
time (415). Lastly, the use of AID systems 
can also contribute to decreases in diabe-
tes distress among adults with type 1 
diabetes and caregivers of children and 
adolescents; however, evidence of beneﬁt 
among children and adolescents remains 
mixed (448,449). 
A combination of educational, behav-
ioral, and psychological approaches is 
needed to address distress, depression, 
and A1C. There are few outcome data on 
long-term systematic treatment of diabe-
tes distress integrated into routine care. 
As the burden of diabetes management 
can vary over time, diabetes distress may 
ﬂuctuate and may need varying treatment 
approaches at different life stages and at 
different levels of diabetes progression. 
Table 5.5—Situations that warrant referral of a person with diabetes to a qualiﬁed behavioral health professional for 
evaluation and treatment 
• A positive screen on a validated screening tool for depressive symptoms, diabetes distress, anxiety, fear of hypoglycemia, suicidality, or 
cognitive impairment 
• The presence of symptoms or suspicions of disordered eating behavior, an eating disorder, or disrupted patterns of eating 
• Intentional omission or underdosing of insulin or noninsulin medication to cause weight loss 
• A serious mental illness is suspected 
• In children and adolescents and families with behavioral self-care difﬁculties, repeated hospitalizations for diabetic ketoacidosis, failure to 
achieve expected developmental milestones, or signiﬁcant distress 
• Low engagement in diabetes self-management behaviors, including declining or impaired ability to perform diabetes self-management 
behaviors 
• Before undergoing metabolic surgery and after surgery, if assessment reveals an ongoing need for adjustment support 
Anxiety 
Recommendations 
5.46 Screen for anxiety symptoms 
at least annually in people with dia-
betes. Health care professionals can 
address anxiety symptoms within the 
scope of their practice. Consider re-
ferral to a qualiﬁed behavioral health 
professional for further assessment 
and treatment if anxiety symptoms in-
terfere with diabetes self-management 
behaviors or quality of life, if not ade-
quately addressed during medical ap-
pointments. B 
5.47 Screen individuals at high risk for 
hypoglycemia or with severe and/or 
frequent hypoglycemia for fear of hy-
poglycemia at least annually and when 
clinically appropriate. E Refer to a 
trained health care professional for 
evidence-based intervention. A 
Anxiety symptoms are common in people 
with diabetes and signiﬁcantly affect clini-
cal outcomes and self-management (450) 
(Tables 5.6 and 5.7). Rates of generalized 
anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, panic dis-
order, social phobia, and posttraumatic 
stress disorder are higher in people with 
diabetes than in those without diabetes 
(450). A systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis found that the pooled prevalence of 
anxiety disorders among individuals with 
diabetes was 28% (451). This systematic 
review and meta-analysis also reported 
that individuals with anxiety disorders 
had a 19% higher risk for type 2 diabetes, 
while those with type 2 diabetes had a 
41% greater risk of developing anxiety 
disorders (451). It is important to note 
that anxiety symptoms may overlap with 
diabetes distress and/or hyperglycemia 
symptoms, which can complicate screen-
ing practices (434). This highlights the im-
portance of conducting screening for both 
diabetes distress and anxiety at least an-
nually in people with diabetes, followed 
by further clinical assessment to ensure 
accurate identiﬁcation. 
Fear of hypoglycemia is a common dia-
betes-speciﬁc concern (452–454) that can 
lead to avoidance of glucose-lowering be-
haviors, such as increasing insulin doses or 
monitoring frequency. Factors contributing 
to fear of hypoglycemia in people with dia-
betes and family members include history 
of nocturnal hypoglycemia, co-occurring 
psychological concerns, and sleep distur-
bances (455). See section 6, “Glycemic 
Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic 
Crises,” for more information about im-
paired awareness of hypoglycemia and 
related fear of hypoglycemia. Other com-
mon sources of diabetes-related anxiety 
include not meeting glycemic goals (456), 
insulin injections or infusion (457), and on-
set of complications (1). People with dia-
betes who exhibit excessive diabetes 
self-management behaviors well beyond 
what is prescribed or needed to achieve 
glycemic goals may be experiencing 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S112 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
symptoms of obsessive-compulsive dis-
order (458). General anxiety is also associ-
ated with injection-related anxiety and 
fear of hypoglycemia (459). 
Table 5.6—Psychosocial concerns and their association with diabetes-related outcomes in adults with type 1 diabetes 
Increased
A1C 
Increased
blood pressure 
Increased
cholesterol 
Increased
macrovascular
complications 
Increased
microvascular
complications 
Decreased
self-care
behaviors 
Comorbid
psychosocial
concerns 
Decreased
quality of life 
Increased
mortality 
Diabetes distress 
(576–579)
+++ 
? 
+ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
? 
Depression and depressive 
symptoms 
(577,578,580,581)
+++ 
? 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
Anxiety (383,582,583) 
+++ 
?
?
? 
? 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
? 
Disordered eating 
behaviors (insulin
omission) (495,584) 
+++ 
? 
?
? 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
Serious mental illness 
(schizophrenia, 
personality disorders) 
(585–587)
+++ 
? 
+ 
+++ 
+++ 
? 
+++ 
? 
+++ 
Cognitive impairment 
(588–592) 
+++ 
++ + 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
++ 
+++ 
? 
+++ 
+++, strong evidence (consistent ﬁ ndings in multiple studies of good methodological quality or one study of excellent methodological quality); ++, moderate evidence (consistent ﬁ ndings in multiple 
studies of fair methodological quality or one study of good methodological quality); +, limited evidence (evidence from one study of fair methodological quality); ?, no data available. 
Evidence-based psychosocial interven-
tions for anxiety include collaborative care 
and CBT. An RCT in adults with type 2 dia-
betes, depression, and anxiety showed 
that those randomized to collaborative 
care were more likely to achieve a clini-
cally signiﬁcant reduction in anxiety symp-
toms at 6 and 12 months compared with 
those receiving usual care (460). Another 
RCT of CBT with adults with type 2 diabe-
tes s howed a r eduction in health anxiety,  
with CBT accounting for 77% of the re-
duction in health anxiety at 16 weeks of 
follow-up; this trial also found decreased 
depressive symptoms and diabetes distress 
(461). For individuals with type 1 diabetes, 
a systematic review and meta-analysis 
found that using diabetes technologies, 
speciﬁcally real-time CGM, sensor-aug-
mented pumps, and AID, reduced fear of 
hypoglycemia independent of the reduc-
tion of hypoglycemia frequency (462). An-
other RCT for young adults with type 1 
diabetes found that a CBT-based interven-
tion reduced fear of hypoglycemia by 8.5% 
compared with control participants and 
led to increased time in range and im-
proved self-management behaviors over 
an 8-week period (463). These ﬁndings 
highlight the need for specialized behav-
ioral interventions with a positive adjunct 
of diabetes technology delivered by qual-
iﬁed professionals to effectively address 
hypoglycemia-related anxiety. 
Depression 
Recommendations 
5.48 Screen for depressive symptoms 
in all people with diabetes at least 
annually and more frequently among 
those with a history of depression. B 
Refer to qualiﬁed behavioral health pro-
fessionals or other health care profes-
sionals with experience using evidence-
based treatment approaches for de-
pression in collaboration with the di-
abetes care team. A 
5.49 Rescreen for depression at di-
agnosis of complications or when there 
are signiﬁcant changes in medical 
status. B 
Elevated depressive symptoms and de-
pressive disorders are common among 
people with diabetes (381,454) (Tables 5.6 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
+++, strong evidence (consistent ﬁ ndings in multiple studies of good methodological quality or one study of excellent methodological quality); ++, moderate evidence (consistent ﬁ ndings in multiple 
studies of fair methodological quality or one study of good methodological quality); +, limited evidence (evidence from one study of fair methodological quality); +/−, inconclusive evidence; ?, no data 
available. 
and 5.7), affecting approximately one 
in four people with type 1 or type 2 
diabetes (384,464), and parents of chil-
dren and adolescents with diabetes (465). 
Co-occurring depressive symptoms and 
diabetes are associated with reduced self-
management, elevated A1C (466), and in-
creased CVD and mortality risk (423,467). 
History of depression, current depression, 
and antidepressant medication use are 
also risk factors for the development of 
type 2 diabetes, particularly in individu-
als with other risk factors, such as over-
weight, obesity, and f amily h istory o f
type 2 diabetes (468–470). At least an-
nual depression screening, and more fre-
quent screening for those with a history 
of depression, is indicated for people with 
type 1 or type 2 diabetes and gestational 
diabetes mellitus. Screening is particularly 
important given that women report higher 
rates of depression than men (471). For 
individuals with type 2 diabetes, the expe-
rience of diabetes-related stigma is associ-
ated with increased depressive symptoms 
(432). Importantly, depressive symptoms 
often overlap with diabetes distress, anxi-
ety symptoms, and hyperglycemia, com-
plicating screening and increasing the 
risk for false positives (434). Conducting 
annual screening for depression, anxiety, 
and diabetes distress will help distinguish 
overlapping symptoms. Positive ﬁnd
 ings 
should be followed by a comprehensive 
clinical assessment to ensure an accurate 
diagnosis. In practice, routine monitoring 
with age-appropriate validated measures 
(1) can help to identify if referral is war-
ranted (397). Multisite studies have dem-
onstrated the feasibility of implementing 
depressive symptom screening protocols 
in diabetes clinics and have published prac-
tical guides for implementation (405,472). 
Table 5.7—Psychosocial concerns and their association with diabetes-related outcomes in adults with type 2 diabetes 
Increased
A1C 
Increased
blood pressure 
Increased
dyslipidemia 
Increased
macrovascular
complications 
Increased
microvascular
complications 
Decreased
self-care
behaviors 
Comorbid
psychosocial
concerns 
Decreased
quality of life 
Increased
mortality 
Diabetes distress (593–599) 
+++ 
+ 
+ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
Depression and depressive 
symptoms (600–607)
+++ 
++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
Anxiety (382,430,601,608–611) 
+++ 
++ 
+ 
+++ 
+ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
Disordered eating behaviors 
(binge eating disorder, night 
eating syndrome) 
(492,496,612–615) 
+/− 
+ 
?
? 
+ 
+ 
+++ 
+++ 
? 
Serious mental illness 
(schizophrenia, bipolar 
disorder) (616–624)
+/− 
++ 
++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
Cognitive impairment 
(625–632) 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
+++ 
 
Person-centered integrated care a p-
proaches have been shown to improve 
both depression and glycemic outcomes (5). 
The behavioral health professional provid-
ing treatment for depression should be 
incorporated into, or collaborate closely 
with, the diabetes treatment team (473). 
Because depressive symptoms may also in-
dicate reduced quality of life due to diabe-
tes burden (also see DIABETES DISTRESS, above),  
it is important to query origins and exacer-
bating factors for those symptoms to dis-
tinguish between diabetes distress and 
depression. RCTs examining pharmacologic 
treatment, group therapy, psychotherapy, 
parenting interventions, mindfulness-based 
approaches, or collaborative care have 
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S113 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S114 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
consistently shown improvements in de-
pressive symptoms, with mixed effects on 
A1C  when depression is t reated  simulta-
neously with diabetes (5,7,392,474-478). 
Additionally, psychological interventions, 
such as CBT, delivered via internet, phone, 
and self-guided interventions have improved 
depressive symptoms (475,479,480). Life-
style interventions targeting nutrition 
and/or physical activity also demonstrate 
beneﬁts for depressive symptoms and A1C 
(251) on their own and when combined 
with CBT (481-483). Finally, one meta-anal-
ysis found that use of GLP-1 RAs led to im-
provement in depressive symptoms among 
adults with type 2 diabetes (484), while an-
other meta-analysis did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant 
change in depressive symptoms (485). It is 
important to note that the medical treat-
ment plan should also be monitored and 
potentially adjusted in response to reduc-
tion in depressive symptoms. 
Disordered Eating Behavior 
Recommendations 
5.50 Screen for disordered or disrupted 
eating using validated screening meas-
ures. Review the medical treatment plan 
to identify potential treatment-related 
effects on hunger/caloric intake. B 
5.51 Reevaluate the treatment plan of 
people with diabetes who present with 
symptoms of disordered eating behav-
iors, an eating disorder, or disrupted 
patterns of eating, ideally in consulta-
tion with a qualiﬁed professional. B 
The estimated prevalence of disordered 
eating behaviors and diagnosable eating 
disorders in people with diabetes varies 
(486-488) (see Tables 5.6 and 5.7). Peo-
ple with type 1 diabetes are at increased 
risk for eating disorders compared with 
people without diabetes (489). The me-
dian prevalence of insulin restriction for 
weight control is 15%, with mixed ﬁndings 
on whether the behavior is more preva-
lent among women than men (489-491). 
In people with type 2 diabetes, binge eat-
ing (excessive food intake with an accom-
panying sense of loss of control) and night 
eating syndrome are commonly reported 
(492). Among those with type 2 diabetes 
treated with insulin, intentional omission is 
also frequently reported (493). People with 
diabetes and diagnosable eating disorders 
have high rates of co-occurring psycho-
social concerns, including diabetes dis-
tress, depression, fear of hypoglycemia, 
and anxiety (494). Eating disorders and 
disordered eating behaviors are also as-
sociated with elevated A1C (495-497). 
Among individuals with type 1 diabetes, 
body image concerns and emotional dis-
tress are common and associated with 
disordered eating behavior (491,494,498). 
A systematic review with limited available 
studies found a higher prevalence of dis-
ordered eating behaviors among children 
and adolescents with type 2 diabetes 
compared with children and adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes (499). Data from 
the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study 
showed that children and adolescents with 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes and household 
food insecurity reported more disordered 
eating behaviors than those with high food 
security (500). 
Diabetes care professionals should moni-
tor for disordered eating behaviors using 
validated measures. Diabetes-speciﬁc 
measures are recommended to assess for 
intentional insulin omission and, accord-
ing to a meta-analysis, show strong asso-
ciations with A1C (498). For individuals 
with type 1 diabetes, the Diabetes Eating 
Problem Survey-Revised (DEPS-R) (501) is
recommended to screen for disordered 
eating behaviors, while the mSCOFF (502), 
a ﬁve-item screening questionnaire, is for 
eating disorders and includes a question 
on insulin omission. Any “yes” response 
should prompt a comprehensive evalua-
tion. For type 2 diabetes, recommended 
screening measures include the Question-
naire on Eating and Weight Patterns-5 
(QEWP-5) (503), the Binge Eating Scale 
(504), and the Night Eating Questionnaire 
(505). 
 
Given the complexities of treating dis-
ordered eating behaviors and disrupted 
eating patterns in people with diabetes, 
interprofessional care teams should in-
clude, or closely collaborate with, a health 
professional trained to identify and treat 
eating behaviors in individuals with diabe-
tes (506). Key qualiﬁcations for such pro-
fessionals include familiarity with diabetes 
physiology, weight-related and psychologi-
cal risk factors for disordered eating be-
haviors, and treatments for diabetes and 
disordered eating behaviors. Caution should 
be taken in labeling individuals with diabe-
tes as having a diagnosable eating disorder, 
as disordered or disrupted eating patterns 
are frequently f ound  to be associated  with  
diabetes and its treatment. Maladaptive 
food intake patterns that appear to have 
a psychological origin may be driven by 
physiologic disruption in hunger and sati-
ety cues, metabolic perturbations, and/or 
secondary distress because of the individu-
al’s inability to control their hunger and 
satiety (507). More rigorous methods to 
identify underlying mechanisms of action 
that drive change in eating and treatment 
behaviors, as well as associated emotional 
distress, are needed (508). 
Reevaluating the treatment plan for 
people with diabetes in consultation with 
trained professionals is essential to en-
sure safety (avoid stigmatizing language, 
do not focus solely on A1C), to minimize 
harm (risk of DKA, severe hypoglycemia, 
complications), and to avoid reinforcing 
maladaptive patterns (avoid rigid carbohy-
drate counting and intensive weight moni-
toring). Inconsistent intervention ﬁndings 
highlight the importance of addressing 
eating disorders and disordered eating be-
haviors in the context of the condition and 
its treatment. Additionally, health care 
teams may consider the appropriateness 
of technology use among people with di-
abetes and disordered eating behaviors, 
although more research on the risks and 
beneﬁts is needed (509). Some efforts 
have focused on preventing disordered 
eating behaviors among individuals with 
type 1 diabetes and on supporting parents 
of children and adolescents with type 1 di-
abetes who are at risk for disordered eat-
ing; however, more RCTs with longer-term 
follow-up are needed (510,511). A feasibil-
ity study of a 12-session CBT and diabetes 
education program for individuals with 
type 1 diabetes and disordered eating 
found that participants reported improve-
ments in disordered eating, diabetes dis-
tress, anxiety, and depressive symptoms 
(512). A 12-week pilot self-guided online 
program for individuals with type 2 dia-
betes and binge eating disorder showed 
promise in beneﬁting eating behaviors, 
depression, and anxiety (513). 
The use of incretin therapies, speciﬁcally 
GLP-1 RAs and potentially dual glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) 
and GLP-1 RAs, may have relevance to the 
treatment of disrupted or disordered eat-
ing (see section 8, “Obesity and Weight 
Management for the Prevention and 
Treatment of Diabetes”). These therapies 
work in the appetite and reward circuitries 
to modulate food intake, reducing uncon-
trollable hunger and overeating (514). A 
systematic review found early evidence for 
GLP-1 RAs being effective in reducing bin-
ge-eating behaviors, and a meta-analysis 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S115 
found GLP-1 RAs are associated with de-
creases in emotional eating (485,515). 
Serious Mental Illness 
Type 2 diabetes incidence is 1.5- to 2.5-
fold higher in individuals with serious 
mental illness, particularly schizophrenia 
and other thought disorders, compared 
with those without a major mental disor-
der (516,517) (see Tables 5.6 and 5.7). 
People with serious mental illness who 
are treated with antipsychotics and 
other psychotropic medications should 
be monitored routinely for prediabetes 
and type 2 diabetes, as these medications 
are associated with metabolic dysregula-
tion, including elevated glucose levels, in-
creased weight, BMI, total cholesterol, 
and LDL cholesterol, as well as decreased 
HDL cholesterol (518,519). Changes in gly-
cemia, body weight, and lipids should be 
monitored every 12-16 weeks, unless clin-
ically indicated to be monitored sooner 
(520). Disordered thinking and judgment 
can make it difﬁcult to engage in behav-
iors that reduce risk factors for type 2 dia-
betes, such as restrained eating for weight 
management. Further, people with serious 
mental illness and diabetes frequently ex-
perience moderate psychological distress, 
indicating pervasive intrusion of behavioral 
health issues into daily functioning (521). 
Serious mental illness is often associated 
with the inability to evaluate and apply 
information to make judgments about 
treatment options. For a person with an 
established diagnosis of a serious mental 
illness affecting judgment, activities of 
daily living, and the ability to collaborate 
with care professionals, the inclusion of 
a nonmedical caretaker in treatment de-
cision-making is beneﬁcial. This caretaker 
can assist with care coordination, engage-
ment with self-management behaviors, 
and participation in social activities to 
improve the well-being of people with di-
abetes and serious mental illness (522). 
Coordinated management of prediabe-
tes or diabetes and serious mental illness 
is recommended to achieve diabetes treat-
ment goals. The diabetes care team, in col-
laboration with other care professionals, 
should work to provide an enhanced level 
of care and self-management support for 
people with diabetes and serious mental 
illness based on individual capacity and 
needs. Such care may include remote mon-
itoring, health care aides, and diabetes 
training for family members, community 
support personnel, and other caregivers. A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of 
nonpharmacologic interventions for people 
with type 2 diabetes and serious mental ill-
ness showed signiﬁcant reductions in psy-
chiatric symptoms, total cholesterol, and 
LDL cholesterol but not improvements in 
A1C, triglycerides, or BMI (523). Qualitative 
research suggests that educational and be-
havioral interventions provide beneﬁt via
group support, accountability, and assis-
tance with applying diabetes knowledge 
(524). 
Recommendations 
5.52 Provide an increased level of 
support for people with diabetes and 
serious mental illness through en-
hanced monitoring of and assistance 
with diabetes self-management behav-
iors. B
  
5.53 Monitor changes in body weight, 
glycemia, and lipids in adolescents 
and adults with diabetes who are 
prescribed second-generation antipsy-
chotic medications; adjust the treat-
ment plan accordingly, if needed. C 
 
Cognitive Capacity and Impairment 
Recommendations 
5.54 Monitor cognitive capacity 
throughout the life span for all individ-
uals with diabetes, particularly in those 
who have documented cognitive dis-
abilities, those who experience severe 
hypoglycemia, very young children, 
and older adults. B 
5.55 Consider referral for a formal as-
sessment if cognitive capacity changes 
or appears to be suboptimal for 
decision-making and/or behavioral self-
management. E 
Cognitive capacity refers to attention, 
memory, logic and reasoning, and audi-
tory and visual processing, all of which 
are involved in diabetes self-management 
(525) (see Tables 5.6 and 5.7). Long-term 
diabetes (type 1 or type 2) is associated with 
cognitive decline (526,527). In people with 
type 1 diabetes, cognitive impairment is 
associated with diabetes-speciﬁc factors
(e.g., younger age at diagnosis, longer 
disease duration, more time in glycemic 
extremes, recurrent DKA, elevated A1C, 
and presence of microvascular complica-
tions), other medical factors (e.g., dysli-
pidemia, intestinal ﬂora, and poorer sleep 
quality), and sociodemographic factors 
 
(e.g., female sex, lower educational level) 
(528). Similarly, in people with type 2 dia-
betes, cognitive decline is associated with 
diabetes-speciﬁc factors (e.g., longer 
duration, elevated A1C, higher fasting 
blood glucose, microvascular complica-
tions, macrovascular complications), other 
medical factors (e.g., hypertension, depres-
sion, physical inactivity), and sociodemo-
graphic factors (e.g., older age, male sex, 
lower education) (529-531). Diagnosis of 
dementia is more prevalent among people 
with diabetes, both type 1 and type 2 (532). 
Executive functioning is an aspect of 
cognitive capacity that has relevance to 
diabetes management. Executive func-
tions refer to a set of cognitive processes 
that enable a person to plan, organize, 
and execute tasks; regulate emotions; 
and control impulses. Declines in cogni-
tive capacity affect executive functioning 
and information processing speed; they 
are not consistent between people, and 
evidence is lacking regarding a known 
course of decline (533). Attention deﬁcit 
hyperactivity disorder, which involves def-
icits in executive functions, is associated 
with a twofold increased risk of type 2 
diabetes (534). Among children, adoles-
cents, and young adults with type 1 dia-
betes, lower executive functioning is linked 
with more self-management difﬁculties 
and elevated A1C ( 535). C onversely, higher
self-regulation is associated with improved 
emotional and diabetes-related functioning 
(536). Thus, monitoring cognitive capacity 
among individuals with or at risk for diabe-
tes is recommended, particularly their self-
monitoring, symptom recognition, and 
decision-making, all of which are mediated 
by executive function (532). 
 
As with other conditions affecting 
mental capacity (e.g., major psychiatric 
disorders), the key concern is whether 
the person can collaborate with the care 
team to achieve metabolic goals and pre-
vent both short-term and long-term com-
plications (521). When cognitive ability 
is altered, declining, or absent, a lay 
care professional should be introduced 
into the care team to serve as a daily 
monitor and liaison to the care team 
(1). Individuals with cognitive impair-
ment may require tailored approaches 
to DSMES that simplify self-management 
behaviors and introduce remote monitor-
ing. Children and adolescents will need 
second-party monitoring (e.g., parents 
and adult caregivers) until they are devel-
opmentally able to evaluate information 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S116 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
and make appropriate self-management 
decisions. 
Episodes of severe hypoglycemia are 
independently associated with cognitive 
decline and  are a risk  factor f or a cceler-
ated decline (537). Early-onset type 1 dia-
betes is associated w ith l ong-term deﬁcits 
in intellectual abilities, especially when 
accompanied by repeated episodes of 
severe hypoglycemia (538), and is corre-
lated with elevated A1C and sensor glucose 
values (539) (see section 14, “Children and 
Adolescents,” for information on early-on-
set diabetes and cognitive abilities and the 
effects of severe hypoglycemia on child-
ren’s cognitive and academic performance). 
For this reason, cognitive capacity should 
be routinely assessed to determine a per-
son’s ability to maintain and adjust self-
management behaviors (e.g., dosing of 
medications, corrections) and to evaluate 
the need for caregiver support. If concerns 
arise, an age-appropriate test of cognitive 
capacity is recommended (1), with consid-
eration given to the developmental stage; 
for example, young children who are not 
expected to self-manage independently 
or older adults who may require ongoing 
monitoring. 
Importantly, the risk of cognitive de-
cline can be reduced through improved 
A1C (540). A systematic review and meta-
analysis comparing cardioprotective glucose-
lowering therapy with control therapy 
found GLP-1 RAs were associated with a 
statistically signiﬁcant reduction in de-
mentia but not SGLT2 inhibitors or piogli-
tazone (541). Additionally, exercise may 
be a potential nonpharmacologic treat-
ment pathway for cognitive impairment 
in older adults with type 2 diabetes (542). 
Sleep Health 
Recommendations 
5.56 Screen for sleep health in peo-
ple with prediabetes or diabetes 
and in those a t r isk f or d iabetes,
including screening for sleep disor-
ders and diabetes-related sleep dis-
ruptions. Refer to sleep medicine 
specialists and/or qualiﬁed behavioral 
health professionals or diabetes care 
team as indicated. B 
 
5.57 Counsel people with diabetes to 
practice sleep-promoting routines and 
habits. A 
The associations between sleep prob-
lems and diabetes are complex: sleep 
disorders are a risk factor for developing 
type 2 diabetes (543,544) and possibly ges-
tational diabetes mellitus (545). Across 
the life span, people with diabetes ex-
perience sleep disruptions and reduced 
sleep quality (546,547). Sleep problems 
are also common in parents of children 
and adolescents with diabetes, especially 
after diagnosis (548,549). Disrupted sleep 
and sleep disorders, including obstructive 
sleep apnea (OSA) (550), insomnia, and 
restless leg syndrome (551), are common 
among people with diabetes. In people 
with type 1 diabetes, estimates of poor 
sleep range from 30% to 50% (552), and 
estimates of moderate to severe OSA 
are >50% (550). In type 2 diabetes, 55% 
of people are estimated to have OSA 
(553), 39% to have insomnia, and 8-45% 
to have restless leg syndrome (i.e., an 
uncontrollable urge to move legs) (554). 
Furthermore, people with type 2 diabe-
tes and restless leg syndrome are more 
likely to experience microvascular and 
macrovascular complications (555) as 
well as depression (556). Additionally, 
people with diabetes who perform shift 
work increase their risk for circadian 
rhythm disorders, which are associated 
with elevated A1C (557), neuropathy 
(558), and decreased psychological well-
being (558). Health care professionals 
should consider a comprehensive evalua-
tion of the daily lifestyles of people with 
diabetes, including sleep duration, shift 
work schedules, and actual days taken off 
work, given their associations with hyper-
glycemia, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and 
weight gain (559). 
The high prevalence of OSA in people 
with diabetes poses signiﬁcant clinical 
implications for diabetes management. 
Sleep fragmentation and hypoxemia acti-
vate the sympathetic nervous system, 
contributing to hyperglycemia, insulin re-
sistance, increased circulating free fatty 
acids, impaired microcirculation, oxidative 
stress, and psychological stress (560). A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis found 
that continuous positive airway pressure 
(CPAP) signiﬁcantly reduced A1C by 0.24% 
(561). Another systematic review and 
meta-analysis compared GLP-1 RAs alone 
or combined with the same interventions 
in the control group in adults with obe-
sity, prediabetes, and/or type 2 diabetes. 
Findings showed that the GLP-1 RAs 
were more effective in reducing apnea-
hypopnea index compared with the con-
trol group in the population with type 2 
diabetes (562). Two phase 3, double-
blind RCTs in adults with OSA and obe-
sity showed that a dual GIP and GLP-1 
RA signiﬁcantly reduced sleep apnea se-
verity and body weight compared with 
placebo after 52 weeks (563). More RCTs 
with people with diabetes are needed to 
determine the effectiveness of GLP-1 RAs 
and dual GIP and GLP-1 RAs as potential 
treatments for OSA. 
Sleep disturbances are associated 
with less engagement in diabetes self-
management and can interfere with achiev-
ing and maintaining glucose levels within 
the goal range (547,550). In type 1 diabe-
tes, risk of hypoglycemia poses speciﬁc 
sleep challenges and may require detailed 
assessment and treatment approaches 
(564). People with type 1 diabetes and 
their family members report worries about 
poor sleep and diabetes self-management 
needs interfering with sleep (565). Diabe-
tes technology has been described as both 
helpful and challenging for sleep (565), 
with the greatest perceived beneﬁts at-
tributed to AID systems (566-568). Given 
these challenges, screening and treat-
ment of sleep disorders should be con-
sidered a part of standardized care for 
people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. 
Importantly,
nonpharmacological
evidence-based strategies are available to 
improve  sleep in people w ith diabetes.
CBT, including CBT for insomnia (392), has 
been shown to improve sleep outcomes, 
A1C (569), fasting glucose (569), and de-
pressive symptoms (570). Evidence also 
suggests sleep extension and pharmaco-
logic treatments can improve sleep out-
comes and possibly insulin resistance 
(564,569). Three RCTs have evaluated in-
somnia in people with diabetes. Suvorex-
ant improved total sleep time and sleep 
efﬁciency, ramelteon improved sleep quality 
and sleep latency, and lemborexant im-
proved sleep onset and sleep maintenance 
(571-573). Finally, sleep education, or 
sleep hygiene, has been shown to im-
prove sleep quality, reduce A1C, and de-
crease insulin resistance in adults with 
type 2 diabetes (574). Diabetes care profes-
sionals are encouraged to counsel people 
with diabetes to use sleep-promoting rou-
tines and practices, such as establishing a 
regular bedtime and rise time, creating a 
dark, quiet area for sleep with temperature 
and humidity control, establishing a pre-
sleep routine, putting electronic devices 
(except diabetes management devices) in 
silent/off mode, exercising during the day, 
 
 
 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S117 
avoiding daytime naps, limiting caffeine 
and nicotine in the evening, avoiding spicy 
foods at night, and avoiding alcohol before 
bedtime (575). For people with diabetes 
who have signiﬁcant sleep difﬁculties, re-
ferral to sleep specialists to address the 
medical and behavioral aspects of sleep is 
recommended, ideally in collaboration with 
the diabetes  care team ( Fig. 5.2). 
References 
1. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F, 
Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care 
for people with diabetes: a position statement of 
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 
2016;39:2126-2140 
2. Powers MA, Bardsley JK, Cypress M, et al. 
Diabetes self-management education and sup-
port in adults with type 2 diabetes: a consensus 
report of the American Diabetes Association, the 
Association of Diabetes Care & Education Spe-
cialists,the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, the 
American Academy of Family Physicians, the 
American Academy of PAs, the American Asso-
ciation of Nurse Practitioners, and the American 
Pharmacists Association. Diabetes Care 2020;43: 
1636-1649 
3.  Speight  J, Holmes-Truscott E, Garza M
 , et a l.
Bringing an end to diabetes stigma and dis-
crimination: an international consensus statement 
on evidence and recommendations. Lancet Dia-
betes Endocrinol 2024;12:61-82 
4. Asmat K, Dhamani K, Gul R, Froelicher ES. The 
effectiveness of patient-centered care vs. usual 
care in type 2 diabetes self-management: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Front Public 
Health 2022;10:994766 
5. Cooper ZW, O’Shields J, Ali MK, Chwastiak L, 
Johnson LCM. Effects of integrated care approaches 
to address co-occurring depression and diabetes: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes 
Care 2024;47:2291-2304 
6. Fisher L, Hessler D, Polonsky WH, et al. 
T1-REDEEM: a randomized controlled trial 
to reduce diabetes distress among adults with 
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1862-
1869
 
 
7. van der Feltz-Cornelis C, Allen SF, Holt RIG, 
Roberts R, Nouwen A, Sartorius N. Treatment 
for comorbid  depressive  disorder or subthreshold
depression in diabetes mellitus: systematic review 
andmeta-analysis. BrainBehav2021;11:e01981 
8. Fitzpatrick SL, Schumann KP, Hill-Briggs F. 
Problem solving interventions for diabetes self-
management and control: a systematic review of 
the literature. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2013;100: 
145-161 
9. Greenwood DA, Howell F, Scher L, et al. A 
framework for optimizing technology-enabled 
diabetes and cardiometabolic care and education: 
the role of the diabetes care and education 
specialist. DiabetesEduc2020;46:315-322 
10. Davis J, Fischl AH, Beck J, et al. 2022 National 
standards for diabetes self-management education 
and support. DiabetesCare 2022;45:484-494 
11. Fitzpatrick SL, Golden SH, Stewart K, et al. 
Effect of DECIDE (Decision-making Education for 
Choices In Diabetes Everyday) program delivery 
modalities on clinical and behavioral outcomes 
 
 
in urban african americans with type 2 diabetes: 
a randomized trial. Diabetes Care 2016;39: 
2149-2157 
12. Brunisholz KD, Briot P, Hamilton S, et al. 
Diabetes self-management education improves 
quality of care and clinical outcomes determined 
by a diabetes bundle measure. J Multidiscip 
Healthc 2014;7:533-542 
13. Dickinson JK, Guzman SJ, Maryniuk MD, et al. 
The use of language in diabetes care and edu-
cation. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1790-1799 
14. Woodard L, Amspoker AB, Hundt NE, et al. 
Comparison of collaborative goal setting with 
enhanced education for managing diabetes-
associated distress and hemoglobin A1c levels: 
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open 
2022;5:e229975 
15. Cheng L, Sit JWH, Choi K-C, et al. The effects 
of an empowerment-based self-management 
intervention on empowerment level, psychological 
distress, and quality of life in patients with poorly 
controlled type 2 diabetes: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Int J Nurs Stud 2021;116:103407 
16. Okeyo HM, Biddle M, Williams LB. Impact of 
diabetes self-management education on A1C 
levels among Black/African Americans: a systematic 
review. Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 2024;50: 
87-95 
17.  Rutten GEHM, V an Vugt H , d e Koning  E
Person-centered diabetes care and patient activa-
tion in people with type 2 diabetes. BMJ Open 
Diabetes Res Care 2020;8:e001926 
18. Li R, Shrestha SS, Lipman R, et al.; Centers for 
Disease  Control  and Prevention (CDC).  Diabetes
self-management education and training among 
privately insured persons with newly diagnosed 
diabetes-United States, 2011-2012. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63:1045-1049 
19. Hildebrand JA, Billimek J, Lee J-A, et al. Effect of 
diabetes self-management education on glycemic 
control in Latino adults with type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Patient Educ 
Couns2020;103:266-275 
20. Chrvala CA, Sherr D, Lipman RD. Diabetes 
self-management education for adults with type 2 
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review of the effect 
on glycemic control. Patient Educ Couns 2016;99: 
926-943 
21. Bekele BB, Negash S, Bogale B, et al. Effect of 
diabetes self-management education (DSME) 
on glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level among 
patients with T2DM: systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Diabetes Metab Syndr 2021;15:177-185 
22. Mendez I, Lundeen EA, Saunders M, 
Williams A, Saaddine J, Albright A. Diabetes 
self-management education and association 
with diabetes self-care and clinical preventive 
care practices. Sci Diabetes Self Manag Care 
2022;48:23-34 
23. Odgers-Jewell K, Ball LE, Kelly JT, Isenring EA, 
Reidlinger DP, Thomas R. Effectiveness of group-
based self-management education for individuals 
with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review with 
meta-analyses and meta-regression. Diabet Med 
2017;34:1027-1039 
24. Winkley K, Upsher R, Stahl D, et al. 
Psychological interventions to improve self-
management of type 1 and type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review. Health Technol Assess 2020; 
24:1-232 
.  
 
25.  Davidson  P, LaManna J , Davis J , et a l. T he
effects of diabetes self-management education on 
quality of life for persons with type 1 diabetes: a 
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. 
Sci DiabetesSelf Manag Care2022;48:111-135 
26. He X, Li J, Wang B, et al. Diabetes self-
management education reduces risk of all-cause 
mortality in type 2 diabetes patients: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Endocrine 2017;55: 
712-731 
27. Thorpe CT, Fahey LE, Johnson H, Deshpande 
M, Thorpe JM, Fisher EB. Facilitating healthy 
coping in patients with diabetes: a systematic 
review. Diabetes Educ 2013;39:33-52 
28. Robbins JM, Thatcher GE, Webb DA, 
Valdmanis VG. Nutritionist visits, diabetes classes, 
and hospitalization rates and charges: the Urban 
Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care 2008;31:655-660 
29.  Strawbridge L M, Lloyd  JT, Meadow A , Riley
GF, Howell BL. One-year outcomes ofdiabetes self-
management training among medicare bene-
ﬁciaries newly diagnosed with diabetes. Med 
Care 2017;55:391-397 
30. Ye W, Kuo S, Kieffer EC, et al. Cost-
effectiveness of a diabetes self-management 
education and support intervention led by 
community health workers and peer leaders: 
projections from the Racial and Ethnic Approaches 
to Community Health Detroit Trial. Diabetes Care 
2021;44:1108-1115 
31. AlHarbiSS,AlajmiMM,AlgabbasSM,Alharbi 
MS. The comparison of self-management group 
education and the standard care for patients with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus: an updated systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Family Med Prim Care 
2022;11:4299-4309 
32. Duncan I, Ahmed T, Li QE, et al. Assessing the 
value of the diabetes educator. Diabetes Educ 
2011;37:638-657 
33. Dallosso H, Mandalia P, Gray LJ, et al. The 
effectiveness of a structured group education pro-
gramme for people with established type 2 
diabetes in a multi-ethnic population in primary 
care: a cluster randomised trial. Nutr Metab 
Cardiovasc Dis 2022;32: 
 
34.  Attridge M
 , Creamer  J, Ramsden  M, Cannings-
John R, Hawthorne K. Culturally appropriate health 
education for people in ethnic minority groups with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2014;2014:CD006424 
35. Chodosh J, Morton SC, Mojica W, et al. Meta-
analysis: chronic disease self-management pro-
grams for older adults. Ann Intern Med 2005; 
143:427-438 
36. Sarkisian CA, Brown AF, Norris KC, Wintz RL, 
Mangione CM. A systematic review of diabetes 
self-care interventions for older, African American, 
or Latinoadults.DiabetesEduc 2003;29:467-479 
37. Cruz-Cobo C, Santi-Cano MJ. Efﬁcacy of 
diabetes education in adults with diabetes mellitus 
type 2 in primary care: a systematic review. J Nurs 
Scholarsh2020;52:155-163 
38. Peyrot M, Rubin RR. Behavioral and psy-
chosocial interventions in diabetes: a concep-
tual review. Diabetes Care 2007;30:2433-2440 
39. Naik AD, Palmer N, Petersen NJ, et al. 
Comparative effectiveness of goal setting in dia-
betes mellitus group clinics: randomized clinical 
trial.ArchInternMed2011;171:453-459 
40. Mannucci E, Giaccari A, Gallo M, et al. Self-
management in patients with type 2 diabetes: 
group-based versus individual education. A 
 
 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S118 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
systematic review with meta-analysis of randomized
trails.NutrMetabCardiovascDis2022;32:330-336
 
 
41. Eberle C, Stichling S. Clinical improvements by 
telemedicine interventions managing type 1 and 
type 2 diabetes: systematic meta-review. J Med 
Internet Res2021;23:e23244 
42. Moschonis G, Siopis G, Jung J, et al.; 
DigiCare4You Consortium. Effectiveness, reach, 
uptake, and feasibility of digital health interventions 
for adults with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis o f r andomised controlled trials.
LancetDigitHealth2023;5:e125-e143 
43. Anderson A, O’Connell SS, Thomas C, 
Chimmanamada R. Telehealth Interventions to 
Improve Diabetes Management Among Black and 
Hispanic Patients: a Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis. J Racial Ethn Health Disparities 2022;9: 
2375-2386 
44. van Eikenhorst L,Taxis K, van Dijk L, de Gier H. 
Pharmacist-led self-management interventions to 
improve diabetes outcomes. A systematic litera-
ture review and meta-analysis. Front Pharmacol 
2017;8:891 
45. Tshiananga JKT, Kocher S, Weber C, Erny-
Albrecht K, Berndt K, Neeser K.The effect of nurse-
led diabetes self-management education on 
glycosylated hemoglobin and cardiovascular risk 
factors: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Educ 2012;38: 
108-123 
46. Evert AB, Dennison M, Gardner CD, et al. 
Nutrition therapy for adults with diabetes or 
prediabetes: a consensus report. Diabetes Care 
2019;42:731-754 
47. Scalzo P. From the Association of Diabetes 
Care & Education Specialists: the role of the dia-
betes care and education specialist as a champion 
of technology integration. Sci Diabetes Self Manag 
Care 2021;47:120-123 
48. Rodriguez K, Ryan D, Dickinson JK, Phan V. 
Improving quality outcomes: the value of diabetes 
care and education specialists. Clin Diabetes 2022; 
40:356-365 
49. Litchman ML, Oser TK, Hodgson L, et al. In-
person and technology-mediated peer support in 
diabetes care: a systematic review of reviews and 
gap analysis. Diabetes Educ 2020;46:230-241 
50. Evans J,White P, Ha H. Evaluating the effec-
tiveness of community health worker interven-
tions on glycaemic control in type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 
2023;402(Suppl 1):S40 
51. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Diabetes Self-Management Education and Support 
(DSMES) Toolkit. The Multidisciplinary DSMES 
Team. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from 
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes-toolkit/php/stafﬁng-
models/multidiscipline-team.html 
52. Tharakan A, McPeek Hinz E, Zhu E, et al. 
Accessibility of diabetes education in the United 
States: barriers, policy implications, and the road 
ahead. Health AffSch 2024;2:qxae097 
53. Arena L, Austin R, Esquivel N, Vigil T, Kaelin-
Kee J, Millstein S. Understanding barriers and 
facilitators to participating in diabetes self-
management education and support services 
from multiple perspectives: results of a mixed-
methods study of Medicaid members, Medicaid 
managed care organizations, and providers in 
New YorkState.Clin Diabetes2024;42:505-514 
54. Roth SE, Gronowski B, Jones KG, et al. 
Evaluation of an integrated intervention to address 
 
clinical care and social needs among patients with 
type 2diabetes.J GenInternMed2023;38:38-44 
55. Greenwood DA, Gee PM, Fatkin KJ, Peeples 
M. A systematic review of reviews evaluating 
technology-enabled diabetes self-management 
education and support. J Diabetes Sci Technol 
2017;11:1015-1027 
56. Powell RE, Zaccardi F, Beebe C, et al. Strategies 
for overcoming therapeutic inertia in type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2137-2154 
57. Johnson CM, D’Eramo Melkus G, Reagan L, et 
al. Learning in a virtual environment to improve type 
2 diabetes outcomes: randomized controlled trial. 
JMIR FormRes2023;7:e40359 
58. Center For Health Law and Policy Innovation. 
Reconsidering cost-sharing for diabetes self-
management education: recommendations for 
policy reform. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available 
from https://chlpi.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/
07/6.11.15-Reconsidering-Cost-Sharing-for-DSME-
cover.jpg
 
 
59. Lee M-K, Lee DY, Ahn H-Y, Park C-Y. A novel 
user utility score for diabetes management using 
tailored mobile coaching: secondary analysis of 
a randomized controlled trial. JMIR Mhealth 
Uhealth 2021;9:e17573 
60. Strategies to Enhance New CGM Use in Early 
Childhood (SENCE) Study Group. A randomized 
clinical trial assessing continuous glucose moni-
toring (CGM) use with standardized education 
with or without a family behavioral intervention 
compared with ﬁngerstick blood glucose moni-
toring in very young children with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2021;44:464-472 
61.  Aronson R,  Brown RE,  Chu L,  et a l. I Mpact  of  
ﬂash glucose Monitoring in pEople with type 2 
Diabetes Inadequately controlled with non-insulin 
Antihyperglycaemic ThErapy (IMMEDIATE): a ran-
domized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 
2023;25:1024-1031 
62. Patil SP, Albanese-O’Neill A, Yehl K, Seley JJ, 
Hughes AS. Professional competencies for dia-
betes technology use in the care setting. Sci 
Diabetes Self Manag Care 2022;48:437-445 
63. Greenwood DA, Litchman ML, Isaacs D, et al. 
A new taxonomy for technology-enabled diabetes 
self-management interventions: results of an 
umbrella review. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;16: 
812-824 
64. Association for Diabetes Care & Education 
Specialists. Diabetes Technology Resources for 
Healthcare Professionals. Accessed 6 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.adces.org/education/
danatech/home 
 
65. H.R.2617 - 117th Congress (2021-2022): 
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2023. (29 
December 2022). Accessed 6 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.congress.gov/bill/
117th-congress/house-bill/2617/text 
 
66. Health and Human Services.Telehealth policy 
updates. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from 
https://telehealth.hhs.gov/providers/telehealth-
policy/telehealth-policy-updates?utm_medium=
share+button&utm_source=mail 
 
67. Medicare. Telehealth. Accessed 6 August 
2025. Available from https://www.medicare.gov/
coverage/telehealth 
 
68. American Diabetes Association. Standards of 
medical care for patients with diabetes mellitus. 
Diabetes Care 1989;12:365-368 
69. Lichtenstein AH, Appel LJ, Vadiveloo M, et al. 
2021 Dietary guidance to improve cardiovascular 
health: a scientiﬁc statement  from t he A merican
Heart Association. Circulation 2021;144:e472-e487 
70. Levin A, Ahmed SB, Carrero JJ, et al. Executive 
summary of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice 
Guideline for the Evaluation  and M
 anagement
of Chronic Kidney Disease: known knowns and 
known unknowns. Kidney Int 2024;105:684-701 
71. Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al. The 
management of type 1 diabetes in adults. A 
consensus report by the American Diabetes Asso-
ciation (ADA) and the European Association for the 
Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 2021;44: 
2589-2625 
72. U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. 
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025. 9th 
ed. 2020. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from 
https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/
ﬁles/2021-03/Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans-
2020-2025.pdf 
 
73. Forouhi NG. Embracing complexity: making 
sense of diet, nutrition, obesity and type 2 dia-
betes. Diabetologia 2023;66:786-799 
74.  Franz M
 J, MacLeod  J, Evert  A, et a l. A cademy
of Nutrition and Dietetics Nutrition Practice 
guideline for type 1 and type 2 diabetes in adults: 
systematic review of evidence for medical nutri-
tion therapy effectiveness and recommendations 
for integration into the nutrition care process. J 
Acad Nutr Diet 2017;117:1659-1679 
75. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al. 
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 
2018. A consensus report by the American Dia-
betes Association (ADA) and the European Asso-
ciation for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes 
Care 2018;41:2669-2701 
76. Marincic PZ, Salazar MV, Hardin A, et al. 
Diabetes self-management education and medical 
nutrition therapy: a multisite study documenting 
the efﬁcacy of registered dietitian nutritionist 
interventions in the management of glycemic con-
trol and diabetic dyslipidemia through retrospec-
tive chart review. J Acad Nutr Diet 2019;119: 
449-463 
77. Briggs Early K, Stanley K. Position of the 
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: the role of 
medical nutrition therapy and registered dietitian 
nutritionists in the prevention and treatment of 
prediabetes and type 2 diabetes. J Acad Nutr Diet 
2018;118:343-353 
78. Dobrow L, Estrada I, Burkholder-Cooley N, 
Miklavcic J. Potential effectiveness of registered 
dietitian nutritionists in healthy behavior inter-
ventions for managing type 2 diabetes in older 
adults: a systematic review. Front Nutr 2021;8: 
737410 
79. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Eat right 
PRO. Referrals to an RDN: Primary Care Provider 
Toolkit. Accessed 5 August 2025. Available from 
https://www.eatrightpro.org/referrals-to-an-rdn-
primary-care-provider-toolkit 
80. Evert Ab, Chomko M. Nutrition Therapy. In 
The Art and Science of Diabetes Care and 
Education. 6th ed. Cornell S, Miller K, Urbanski P, 
Eds. Association of Diabetes Care & Education 
Specialists, 2023, p. 455-484 
81. Zeng B-T, Pan H-Q, Li F-D, Ye Z-Y, Liu Y, Du J-W. 
Comparative efﬁcacyofdifferenteatingpatterns in 
the management of type 2 diabetes and predia-
 
 
 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S119 
betes: an arm-based Bayesian network meta-
analysis. J DiabetesInvestig 2023;14:263–288 
82. Benson G, Hayes J. An update on the medi­
terranean, vegetarian, and DASH eatingpatterns in 
people with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Spectr 2020; 
33:125–132 
83. English LK, Ard JD, Bailey RL, et al. Evaluation 
of dietary patterns and all-cause mortality: a 
systematic review. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4: 
e2122277 
84. Ge L, Sadeghirad B, Ball GDC, et al. Com­
parison of dietary macronutrient patterns of 14 
popular named dietary programmes for weight 
and cardiovascular risk factor reduction in adults: 
systematic review and network meta-analysis of 
randomised trials. BMJ 2020;369:m696 
85. Bonekamp NE, van Damme I, Geleijnse JM, et 
al. Effect of dietary patterns on cardiovascular risk 
factors in people with type 2 diabetes. A 
systematic review and network meta-analysis. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;195:110207 
86. Pilla SJ, Yeh H-C, Mitchell CM, et al.; DASH4D 
Collaborative Research Group. Dietary patterns, 
sodium reduction, and blood pressure in type 2 
diabetes: the DASH4D randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Intern Med 2025;185:937–946 
87. American Diabetes Association. Nutrition for 
Life: Diabetes Plate Method. Accessed 6 August 
2025. Available from https://professional.diabetes 
.org/sites/dpro/ﬁles/2023-12/plan_your_plate.pdf 
88. Bowen ME, Cavanaugh KL, Wolff K, et al. The 
diabetes nutrition education study randomized 
controlled trial: a comparative effectiveness study 
of approaches to nutrition in diabetes self-
management education. Patient Educ Couns 2016; 
99:1368–1376 
89. Builes-Montaño CE, Ortiz-Cano NA, Ramirez-
Rincón A, Rojas-Henao NA. Efﬁcacy and safety 
of carbohydrate counting versus other forms of 
dietary advice in patients with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomised clinical trials. J Hum Nutr Diet 2022; 
35:1030–1042 
90. Witkow S, Liberty IF, Goloub I, et al. Simplifying 
carb counting: a randomized controlled study— 
feasibility and efﬁcacy of anindividualized, simple, 
patient-centred carb counting tool. Endocrinol 
Diabetes Metab 2023;6:e411 
91. Haidar A, Legault L, Raffray M, et al. A 
randomized crossover trial to compare automa­
ted insulin delivery (the artiﬁcial pancreas) with 
carbohydrate counting or simpliﬁed qualitative 
meal-size estimation in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 
Care 2023;46:1372–1378 
92. Joubert M, Meyer L, Doriot A, Dreves B, 
Jeandidier N, Reznik Y. Prospective independent 
evaluation of the carbohydrate counting accuracy 
of two smartphone applications. Diabetes Ther 
2021;12:1809–1820 
93. Vasiloglou MF, Mougiakakou S, Aubry E, et al. 
A comparative study on carbohydrate estimation: 
GoCARB vs. dietitians. Nutrients 2018;10:741 
94. Krause C, Sommerhalder K, Beer-Borst S, Abel 
T. Just a subtle difference? Findings from a sys­
tematic review on deﬁnitions of nutrition literacy 
and food literacy. Health Promot Int 2018;33: 
378–389 
95. Food Literacy Center. What is food literacy? 
Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from https:// 
www.foodliteracycenter.org/about 
96. Walker GS, Chen JY, Hopkinson H, Sainsbury 
CAR, Jones GC. Structured education using Dose 
Adjustment for Normal Eating (DAFNE) reduces 
long-term HbA1c and HbA1c variability. Diabet 
Med 2018;35:745–749 
97. Delahanty LM, Nathan DM, Lachin JM, 
et al.; Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/ 
Epidemiology of Diabetes. Association of diet with 
glycated hemoglobin during intensive treatment 
of type 1 diabetes in the Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2009;89: 
518–524 
98. Sacks FM, Bray GA, Carey VJ, et al. Com­
parison of weight-loss diets with different com­
positions of fat, protein, and carbohydrates. N Engl 
J Med2009;360:859–873 
99. Gardner CD, Landry MJ, Perelman D, et al. 
Effect of a ketogenic diet versus Mediterranean 
diet on glycated hemoglobin in individuals with 
prediabetes and type 2 diabetes mellitus: the 
interventional Keto-Med randomized crossover 
trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2022;116:640–652 
100. Ichikawa T, Okada H, Hironaka J, et al. 
Efﬁcacy of long-term low carbohydrate diets for 
patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. J Diabetes Investig 2024;15: 
1410–1421 
101. Garbutt J, England C, Jones AG, Andrews RC, 
Salway R, Johnson L. Is glycaemic control asso­
ciated with dietary patterns independent of 
weight change in people newly diagnosed with 
type 2 diabetes? Prospective analysis of the Early­
ACTivity-In-Diabetestrial. BMC Med2022;20:161 
102. Saslow LR, Daubenmier JJ, Moskowitz JT, et 
al. Twelve-month outcomes of a randomized trial 
of 
a 
moderate-carbohydrate 
versus 
very 
low-carbohydrate diet in overweight adults with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus or prediabetes. Nutr 
Diabetes 2017;7:304 
103. Korsmo-Haugen H-K, Brurberg KG, Mann J, 
Aas A-M. Carbohydrate quantity in the dietary 
management of type 2 diabetes: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 
2019;21:15–27 
104. Tian W, Cao S, Guan Y, et al. The effects 
of low-carbohydrate diet on glucose and lipid 
metabolism in overweight or obese patients with 
T2DM: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Front Nutr 2024;11:1516086 
105. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA 
revises labels of SGLT2 inhibitors for diabetes to 
include warnings about too much acid in the blood 
and serious urinary tract infections. Accessed 6 
August 2025. Available from https://www.fda.gov/ 
drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-revises­
labels-sglt2-inhibitors-diabetes-include-warnings­
about-too-much-acid-blood-and-serious#:∼:text= 
To%20lessen%20the%20risk%20of,issued%20on% 
20May%2015%2C%202015%20 
106. Ozoran H,Matheou M,Dyson P,Karpe F,Tan 
GD. Type 1 diabetes and low carbohydrate diets— 
deﬁning the degree of nutritional ketosis. Diabet 
Med 2023;40:e15178 
107. AttayeI,WarmbrunnMV,BootANAF,etal.A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of dietary 
interventions modulating gut microbiota and car­
diometabolic diseases-striving for new standards 
in microbiome studies. Gastroenterology 2022; 
162:1911–1932 
108. Partula V, Deschasaux M, Druesne-Pecollo N, 
et al.; Milieu Intérieur Consortium. Associations 
between consumption of dietary ﬁbers and the 
risk of cardiovascular diseases, cancers, type 2 
diabetes, and mortality in the prospective 
NutriNet-Santé cohort. Am J Clin Nutr 2020;112: 
195–207 
109. Reynolds AN, Akerman AP, Mann J. Dietary 
ﬁbre and whole grains in diabetes management: 
systematic review and meta-analyses. PLoS Med 
2020;17:e1003053 
110. Qi X, Chiavaroli L, Lee D, et al. Effect of 
important food sources of fructose-containing 
sugars on inﬂammatory biomarkers: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of controlled feeding 
trials. Nutrients 2022;14:3986 
111. Zafar MI, Mills KE, Zheng J, et al. Low­
glycemic index diets as an intervention for dia­
betes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J 
Clin Nutr 2019;110:891–902 
112. Vega-López S, Venn BJ, Slavin JL. Relevance 
of the glycemic index and glycemic load for body 
weight, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. 
Nutrients 2018;10:1361 
113. Jenkins DJA, Willett WC, Yusuf S, et al.; 
Clinical Nutrition & Risk Factor Modiﬁcation Centre 
Collaborators. Association of glycaemic index and 
glycaemic load with type 2 diabetes, cardio­
vascular disease, cancer, and all-cause mortality: a 
meta-analysis of mega cohorts of more than 
100000 participants. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 
2024;12:107–118 
114. Chiavaroli L, Lee D, Ahmed A, et al. Effect of 
low glycaemic index or load dietary patterns on 
glycaemic control and cardiometabolic risk factors 
in diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis 
of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 2021;374: 
n1651 
115. Thomas D, Elliott EJ. Low glycaemic index, or 
low glycaemic load, diets for diabetes mellitus. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev2009;2009:CD006296 
116. Smith TA, Smart CE, Howley PP, Lopez PE, 
King  BR.  For  a  high fat,  high protein breakfast,  
preprandial administration of 125% of the insulin 
dose improves postprandial glycaemic excursions 
in people with type 1 diabetes using multiple daily 
injections: a cross-over trial. Diabet Med 2021;38: 
e14512 
117. Bell KJ, Fio CZ, Twigg S, et al. Amount and 
type of dietary fat, postprandial glycemia, and 
insulin requirements in type 1 diabetes: a rando­
mized within-subject trial. Diabetes Care 2020;43: 
59–66 
118. FurthnerD,LukasA,SchneiderAM,etal.The 
role of protein and fat intake on insulin therapy in 
glycaemic control of paediatric type 1 diabetes: a 
systematic review and research gaps. Nutrients 
2021;13:3558 
119.  Al Balwi R,  Al Madani W,  Al Ghamdi A.  
Efﬁcacy of insulin dosing algorithms for high-fat 
high-protein mixed meals to control postprandial 
glycemic excursions in people living with type 1 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:1635–1646 
120. Bell KJ, Toschi E, Steil GM, Wolpert HA. 
Optimized mealtime insulin dosing for fat and 
protein in type 1 diabetes: application of a model-
based approach to derive insulin doses for open-
loop diabetes management. Diabetes Care 2016; 
39:1631–1634 
121. Metwally M, Cheung TO, Smith R, Bell KJ. 
Insulin pump dosing strategies for meals varying in 
fat, protein or glycaemic index or grazing-style 
meals in type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;172:108516 
122. Petrovski G, Campbell J, Pasha M, et al. 
Simpliﬁed meal announcement versus precise 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S120 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
carbohydrate counting in adolescents with type 1 
diabetes using the MiniMed 780G advanced 
hybrid closed loop system: a randomized con­
trolled trial comparing glucose control. Diabetes 
Care 2023;46:544–550 
123. Phillip M, Nimri R, Bergenstal RM, et al. 
Consensus recommendations for the use of auto­
mated insulin delivery technologies in clinical 
practice. Endocr Rev 2023;44:254–280 
124. Lesser LI. In adults at CV risk, Mediterranean-
style or low-fat dietary programs vs. minimal 
interventions reduce all-cause mortality. Ann 
Intern Med 2023;176:JC78 
125. Ley SH, Hamdy O, Mohan V, Hu FB. Pre­
vention and management of type 2 diabetes: 
dietary components and nutritional strategies. 
Lancet 2014;383:1999–2007 
126. Jiang S, Fang J, Li W. Protein restriction for 
diabetic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev2023;1:CD014906 
127. Viguiliouk E, Stewart SE, Jayalath VH, et al. 
Effect of replacing animal protein with plant 
protein on glycemic  control  in  diabetes:  a  sys­
tematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials.Nutrients 2015;7:9804–9824 
128. Lamberg-Allardt C, Bärebring L, Arnesen EK, 
et al. Animal versus plant-based protein and risk of 
cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review of randomized controlled trials 
and prospective cohort studies. Food Nutr Res 
2023;67:10.29219/fnr.v67.9003 
129. Sullivan VK, Kim H, Caulﬁeld LE, Steffen 
LM, Selvin E, Rebholz CM. Plant-based dietary 
patterns and incident diabetes in the Athero­
sclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Dia­
betesCare 2024;47:803–809 
130. Willett W, Rockström J, Loken B, et al. Food 
in the Anthropocene: the EAT-Lancet Commission 
on healthy diets from sustainable food systems. 
Lancet 2019;393:447–492 
131. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvadó J, et al.; 
PREDIMED Study Investigators. Primary preven­
tion of cardiovascular disease with a Mediter­
ranean diet supplemented with extra-virgin olive 
oil or nuts. N Engl J Med 2018;378:e34 
132. Forouhi NG, Imamura F, Sharp SJ, et al. 
Association of plasma phospholipid n-3 and n-6 
polyunsaturated fatty acids with type 2 diabetes: 
the EPIC-InterAct case-cohort study. PLoS Med 
2016;13:e1002094 
133. Wang DD, Li Y, Chiuve SE, et al. Association of 
speciﬁc dietary fats with total and cause-speciﬁc 
mortality. JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:1134–1145 
134. Sebastian SA, Padda I, Johal G. Long-term 
impact of Mediterranean diet on cardiovascular 
disease prevention: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Curr Probl 
Cardiol 2024;49:102509 
135. Kirkpatrick CF, Sikand G, Petersen KS, et al. 
Nutrition interventions for adults with dyslipide­
mia: a clinical perspective from the National Lipid 
Association. J Clin Lipidol 2023;17:428–451 
136. Karam G, Agarwal A, Sadeghirad B, et al. 
Comparison of seven popular structured dietary 
programmes and risk of mortality and major 
cardiovascular events in patients at increased 
cardiovascular risk: systematic reviewand network 
meta-analysis. BMJ 2023;380:e072003 
137. Rosqvist F, Kullberg J, Ståhlman M, et al. 
Overeating saturated fat promotes fatty liver and 
ceramides compared with polyunsaturated fat: a 
randomized trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019; 
104:6207–6219 
138. Schwab U, Reynolds AN, Sallinen T, Rivellese 
AA, Risérus U. Dietary fat intakes and cardio­
vascular disease risk in adults with type 2 diabetes: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Nutr 
2021;60:3355–3363 
139. Sacks FM, Lichtenstein AH, Wu JHY, et al.; 
American Heart Association. Dietary fats and 
cardiovascular disease: a presidential advisory 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation 
2017;136:e1–e23 
140. Bosch J, Gerstein HC, Dagenais GR, et al.; 
ORIGIN Trial Investigators. n-3 fatty acids and 
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with dysgl­
ycemia.N Engl J Med 2012;367:309–318 
141. Wheeler ML, Dunbar SA, Jaacks LM, et al. 
Macronutrients, food groups, and eating patterns 
in the management of diabetes: a systematic 
review of the literature, 2010. Diabetes Care 2012; 
35:434–445 
142. Brown TJ, Brainard J, Song F, Wang X, 
Abdelhamid A, Hooper L; PUFAH Group. Omega-3, 
omega-6, and total dietary polyunsaturated fat for 
prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomised controlled trials. BMJ2019;366:l4697 
143. BowmanL,MafhamM,WallendszusK,etal.; 
ASCEND Study Collaborative Group. Effects of n-3 
fatty acid supplements in diabetes mellitus. N Engl 
J Med 2018;379:1540–1550 
144. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Miller M, et al.; REDUCE-IT 
Investigators. Cardiovascular risk reduction with 
icosapent ethyl for hypertriglyceridemia. N Engl J 
Med 2019;380:11–22 
145. Hodson EM, Cooper TE. Altered dietary salt 
intake for preventing diabetic kidney disease and 
its progression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023; 
1:CD006763 
146. Han S, Cheng D, Liu N, Kuang H. The 
relationship between diabetic risk factors, diabetic 
complications and salt intake. J Diabetes Com­
plications 2018;32:531–537 
147. Morales-Alvarez MC, Nissaisorakarn V, 
Appel LJ, et al. Effects of reduced dietary sodium 
and the DASH diet on GFR: the DASH-sodium trial. 
Kidney360 2024;5:569–576 
148. Hannon BA, Fairﬁeld WD, Adams B, Kyle T, 
Crow M, Thomas DM. Use and abuse of dietary 
supplements in persons with diabetes. Nutr 
Diabetes 2020;10:14 
149. Kazemi A, Ryul Shim S, Jamali N, et al. 
Comparison of nutritional supplements for gly­
cemic control in type 2 diabetes: a systematic 
review and network meta-analysis of randomized 
trials. Diabetes ResClin Pract 2022;191:110037 
150. National Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health. Dietary and Herbal Supple­
ments. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from 
https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/dietary-and­
herbal-supplements 
151. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Dietary 
Supplements. Accessed 6 August 2025. Available 
from https://www.fda.gov/food/dietary­
supplements 
152. Dwyer JT, Coates PM, Smith MJ. Dietary 
supplements: regulatory challenges and research 
resources. Nutrients 2018;10:41 
153. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Dietary 
Supplement Ingredient Directory. Accessed 6 
August 2025. Available from https://www.fda.gov/ 
food/dietary-supplements/dietary-supplement­
ingredient-directory 
154. Mangione CM, Barry MJ, Nicholson WK, et 
al.; US Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin, 
mineral, and multivitamin supplementation to 
prevent cardiovascular disease and cancer: US 
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation 
statement. JAMA 2022;327:2326–2333 
155. Pittas AG, Kawahara T, Jorde R, et al.Vitamin 
D and risk for type 2 diabetes in people with 
prediabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of individual participant data from 
3 randomized clinical trials. Ann Intern Med 2023; 
176:355–363 
156. Dawson-Hughes B, Nelson J, Pittas AG, et al. 
Intratrial exposure to vitamin D and new-onset 
diabetes among adults with prediabetes: a 
secondary analysis from the Vitamin D and Type 2 
Diabetes (D2d) Study. Diabetes Care 2021;43: 
2916–2922 
157. Barbarawi M, Zayed Y, Barbarawi O, et al. 
Effect of vitamin D supplementation on the inci­
dence of diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2020;105:dgaa335 
158. Barbarawi M, Kheiri B, Zayed Y, et al.Vitamin 
D supplementation and cardiovascular disease 
risks in more than 83 000 individuals in 21 rando­
mized clinical trials: a meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol 
2019;4:765–776 
159. Jayedi A, Daneshvar M, Jibril AT, et al. Serum 
25(OH)D concentration, vitamin D supplementa­
tion, and risk of cardiovascular disease and 
mortality in patients with type 2 diabetes or 
prediabetes: a systematic review and dose-
response meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 2023;118: 
697–707 
160. Dadon Y, Hecht Sagie L, Mimouni FB, Arad I, 
Mendlovic J. Vitamin D and insulin-dependent 
diabetes: a systematic review of clinical trials. 
Nutrients 2024;16:1042 
161. Moridpour AH, Kavyani Z, Khosravi S, et al. 
The effect of cinnamon supplementation on 
glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: an updated systematic review and dose-
response meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Phytother Res 2024;38:117–130 
162. Khattab R, Albannawi M, Alhajjmohammed 
D, et al. Metformin-induced vitamin B12 deﬁciency 
among type 2 diabetes mellitus’ patients: a sys­
tematic review. Curr Diabetes Rev 2023;19: 
e180422203716 
163. National Institutes of Health. Ofﬁce of 
Dietary Supplements. Multivitamin/mineral Sup­
plements. Fact Sheet for Health Professionals. 
Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from https://ods 
.od.nih.gov/factsheets/MVMS-HealthProfessional/ 
164. World Health Organization. No level of 
alcohol consumption is safe for our health. 
Accessed 6 August 2025. Available from https:// 
www.who.int/europe/news/item/04-01-2023-no­
level-of-alcohol-consumption-is-safe-for-our-health 
165. Anderson BO, Berdzuli N, Ilbawi A, et al. 
Health and cancer risks associated with low 
levels of alcohol consumption. Lancet Public Health 
2023;8:e6–e7 
166. de Souza ABC, Correa-Giannella MLC, 
Gomes MB, Negrato CA, Nery M. Epidemiology 
and risk factors of hypoglycemia in subjects with 
type 1 diabetes in Brazil: a cross-sectional, multi-
center study. Arch Endocrinol Metab 2022;66: 
784–791 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S121 
167. Llamosas-FalcónL,RehmJ,BrightS,etal.The 
relationship between alcohol consumption, BMI, 
and type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and dose-
response meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 2023;46: 
2076–2083 
168. Krittanawong C, Isath A, Rosenson RS, et al. 
Alcohol consumption and cardiovascular health. 
Am J Med 2022;135:1213–1230.e3 
169. National Agricultural Library, U.S. Depart­
ment of Agriculture. Nutritive and nonnutritive 
sweetener resources. Accessed 6 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.nal.usda.gov/human­
nutrition-and-food-safety/food-composition/ 
sweeteners 
170. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food 
Additives & Petitions. Aspartame and Other 
Sweeteners in Food. Accessed 8 September 2025. 
Available from https://www.fda.gov/food/food­
additives-petitions/aspartame-and-other-
sweeteners-food#:∼:text=Text%20Version%20 
of%20Safe%20Levels%20of%20Sweeteners& 
text=The%20ADI%20in%20milligrams%20per, 
5%20mg/kg%20bw/d 
171. Lohner S, Kuellenberg de Gaudry D, Toews I, 
Ferenci T, Meerpohl JJ. Non-nutritive sweeteners 
for diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2020;5:CD012885 
172. Zhang R, Noronha JC, Khan TA, et al. The 
effect of non-nutritive sweetened beverages on 
postprandial glycemic and endocrine responses: a 
systematic review and network meta-analysis. 
Nutrients 2023;15:1050 
173. Sylvetsky AC, Chandran A, Talegawkar SA, 
Welsh JA, Drews K, El Ghormli L. Consumption of 
beverages containing low-calorie sweeteners, diet, 
and cardiometabolic health in youth with type 2 
diabetes. J Acad Nutr Diet 2020;120:1348–1358.e6 
174. Golzan SA, Movahedian M, Haghighat N, 
Asbaghi O, Hekmatdoost A. Association between 
non-nutritive sweetener consumption and liver 
enzyme levels in adults: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Nutr 
Rev 2023;81:1105–1117 
175. Miller PE, Perez V. Low-calorie sweeteners 
and body weightand composition: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials and prospective 
cohort studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;100:765–777 
176. Rogers PJ, Hogenkamp PS, de Graaf C, et al. 
Does low-energy sweetener consumption affect 
energy intake and body weight? A systematic 
review, including meta-analyses, of the evidence 
from human and animal studies. Int J Obes (Lond) 
2016;40:381–394 
177. Laviada-Molina H, Molina-Segui F, Pérez-
Gaxiola G, et al. Effects of nonnutritive sweeteners 
on body weight and BMI in diverse clinical 
contexts: systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Obes Rev 2020;21:e13020 
178. Azad MB, Abou-Setta AM, Chauhan BF, et al. 
Nonnutritive sweeteners and cardiometabolic 
health: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials and prospective 
cohort studies. CMAJ 2017;189:e929–e939 
179. Lee JJ, Khan TA, McGlynn N, et al. Relation of 
change or substitution of low- and no-calorie 
sweetened beverages with cardiometabolic out­
comes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
prospective cohort studies. Diabetes Care 2022; 
45:1917–1930 
180. Mattes RD, Popkin BM. Nonnutritive 
sweetener consumption in humans: effects on 
appetite and food intake and their putative 
mechanisms.Am JClinNutr 2009;89:1–14 
181. McGlynn ND, Khan TA, Wang L, et al. 
Association of low- and no-calorie sweetened 
beverages as a replacement for sugar-sweetened 
beverages with body weight and cardiometabolic 
risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 
Netw Open2022;5:e222092 
182. Gostoli S, Raimondi G, Popa AP, Giovannini 
M, Benasi G, Rafanelli C. Behavioral lifestyle inter­
ventions for weight loss in overweight or obese 
patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review 
of the literature. Curr Obes Rep 2024;13:224–241 
183. Balk EM, Earley A, Raman G, Avendano EA, 
Pittas AG, Remington PL. Combined diet and 
physical activity promotion programs to prevent 
type 2 diabetes among persons at increased risk: a 
systematic review for the Community Preventive 
Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 2015;163: 
437–451 
184. Franz MJ, Boucher JL, Rutten-Ramos S, 
VanWormer JJ. Lifestyle weight-loss intervention 
outcomes in overweight and obese adults with 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Acad Nutr 
Diet2015;115:1447–1463 
185. Garvey WT, Ryan DH, Bohannon NJV, et al. 
Weight-loss therapy in type 2 diabetes: effects of 
phentermine and topiramate extended release. 
Diabetes Care 2014;37:3309–3316 
186. Kahan S, Fujioka K. Obesity pharmaco­
therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 
Spectr 2017;30:250–257 
187. Hemmingsen B, Gimenez-Perez G, Mauricio 
D, Roque IFM, Metzendorf MI, Richter B. Diet, 
physical activity or both for prevention or delay of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus and its associated comp­
lications in people at increased risk of developing 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev2017;12:CD003054 
188. Rebello CJ, Zhang D, Kirwan JP, et al. Effect of 
exercise training on insulin-stimulated glucose 
disposal: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Int J Obes (Lond) 
2023;47:348–357 
189. Singh N, Stewart RAH, Benatar JR. Intensity 
and duration of lifestyle interventions for long­
term weight loss and association with mortality: a 
meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ Open 
2019;9:e029966 
190. Lean ME, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al. Primary 
care-led weight management for remission of 
type 2 diabetes (DiRECT): an open-label, cluster­
randomised trial. Lancet 2018;391:541–551 
191. Wing RR, Lang W, Wadden TA, et al.; Look 
AHEAD Research Group. Beneﬁts of modest 
weight loss in improving cardiovascular risk factors 
in overweight and obese individuals with type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1481–1486 
192. Aukan MI, Coutinho S, Pedersen SA, Simpson 
MR, Martins C. Differences in gastrointestinal 
hormones and appetite ratings between indi­
viduals with and without obesity—a systematic  
review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev 2023;24: 
e13531 
193. Farhat G, Mellor DD, Sattar N, Harvie M, 
Issa B, Rutter MK. Effectiveness of lifestyle 
interventions/culturally bespoke programmes in 
South Asian ethnic groups targeting weight loss for 
prevention and/or remission of type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of inter­
vention trials. J Hum Nutr Diet2024;37:550–563 
194. Wing RR; Look AHEAD Research Group. Does 
lifestyle intervention improve health of adults with 
overweight/obesity and type 2 diabetes? Findings 
from the Look AHEAD randomized trial. Obesity 
(SilverSpring) 2021;29:1246–1258 
195. Garvey WT. Long-term health beneﬁts of 
intensive lifestyle intervention in the Look AHEAD 
study. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2021;29:1242–1243 
196. Davies M, Færch L, Jeppesen OK, et al.; STEP 
2 Study Group. Semaglutide 2·4 mg once a week in 
adults with overweight or obesity, and type 2 
diabetes (STEP 2): a randomised, double-blind, 
double-dummy, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. 
Lancet 2021;397:971–984 
197.  Jastreboff  AM, Aronne  LJ, Ahmad  NN, et  al.;  
SURMOUNT-1 Investigators. Tirzepatide once 
weekly for the treatment of obesity. N Engl J 
Med 2022;387:205–216 
198. Garvey WT, Frias JP, Jastreboff AM, et al.; 
SURMOUNT-2 investigators. Tirzepatide once 
weekly for the treatment of obesity in people 
with type 2 diabetes (SURMOUNT-2): a double-
blind, randomised,multicentre,placebo-controlled, 
phase3trial.Lancet2023;402:613–626 
199. Prinz N, Schwandt A, Becker M, et al. 
Trajectories of body mass index from childhood to 
young adulthood among patients with type 1 
diabetes—a longitudinal group-based modeling 
approach based on the DPV Registry. J Pediatr 
2018;201:78–85.e4 
200. Lipman TH, Levitt Katz LE, Ratcliffe SJ, et al. 
Increasing incidence of type 1 diabetes in youth: 
twenty years of the Philadelphia Pediatric Diabetes 
Registry. DiabetesCare 2013;36:1597–1603 
201. Park J, Ntelis S, Yunasan E, et al. Glucagon­
like peptide 1 analogues as adjunctive therapy for 
patients with type 1 diabetes: an updated sys­
tematicreview and meta-analysis.J ClinEndocrinol 
Metab 2023;109:279–292 
202. Sumithran P, Prendergast LA, Delbridge E, et 
al. Long-term persistence of hormonal adap­
tations to weight loss. N Engl J Med 2011;365: 
1597–1604 
203. Li L, Soll D, Leupelt V, Spranger J, Mai K. 
Weight loss-induced improvement of body weight 
and insulin sensitivity is not ampliﬁed by a 
subsequent 12-month weight maintenance inter­
vention but is predicted by adaption of adipose 
atrial natriuretic peptide system: 48-month results 
of a randomized controlled trial. BMC Med 2022; 
20:238 
204. Tomah S, Zhang H, Al-Badri M, et al. Long­
term effect of intensive lifestyle intervention on 
cardiometabolic risk factors and microvascular 
complications in patients with diabetes in real-
world clinical practice: a 10-year longitudinal 
study. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2023;11: 
e003179 
205. Ekong G, Kavookjian J. Motivational inter­
viewing and outcomes in adults with type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review. Patient Educ Couns 
2016;99:944–952 
206. Nip ASY, Reboussin BA, Dabelea D, et al.; 
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group. 
Disordered eating behaviors in youth and young 
adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes receiving 
insulin therapy: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth 
Study. DiabetesCare 2019;42:859–866 
207. Ye W, Xu L,Ye Y, et al.The efﬁcacy and safety 
of meal replacement in patients with type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2023;108:3041–3049 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S122 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
208. Murphy E, Finucane FM. Structured lifestyle 
modiﬁcation as an adjunct to obesity pharmaco­
therapy: there is much to learn. Int J Obes (Lond) 
2025;49:427–432 
209. Lean MEJ, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al. 
Durability of a primary care-led weight-manage­
ment intervention for remission of type 2 diabetes: 
2-year results of the DiRECT open-label, cluster­
randomised trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 
2019;7:344–355 
210. Raben A, Vestentoft PS, Brand-Miller J, et al. 
The PREVIEW intervention study: results from a 
3-year randomized 2 x 2 factorial multinational 
trial investigating the role of protein, glycaemic 
index and physical activity for prevention of type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:324–337 
211. Salvia MG, Quatromoni PA. Behavioral app­
roaches to nutrition and eating patterns for 
managing type 2 diabetes: a review. Am J Med 
Open 2023;9:100034 
212. Henry CJ, Kaur B, Quek RYC. Chrononutrition 
in the management of diabetes. Nutr Diabetes 
2020;10:6 
213. Liu J, Yi P, Liu F. The effect of early time-
restricted eating vs later time-restricted eating on 
weight loss and metabolic health. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2023;108:1824–1834 
214. Wang L, Ma Q, Fang B, et al. Shift work is 
associated with an increased riskof type 2 diabetes 
and elevated RBP4 level: cross sectional analysis 
from the OHSPIW cohort study. BMC Public Health 
2023;23:1139 
215. Jamshed H, Steger FL, Bryan DR, et al. 
Effectiveness of early time-restricted eating for 
weight loss, fat loss, and cardiometabolic health in 
adults with obesity: a randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Intern Med2022;182:953–962 
216. LoweDA,WuN,Rohdin-BibbyL,etal.Effects 
of time-restricted eating on weight loss and other 
metabolic parameters in women and men with 
overweight and obesity: the TREAT randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2020;180:1491– 
1499 
217. Schroor MM, Joris PJ, Plat J, Mensink RP. 
Effects of intermittent energy restriction com­
pared with those of continuous energy restriction 
on body composition and cardiometabolic risk 
markers—a systematic review  and  meta-analysis  
of randomized controlled trials in adults. Adv Nutr 
2024;15:100130 
218. Pappachan JM. In T2DM with obesity, time-
restricted eating increased weight loss and 
reduced HbA1c level at 6 mo. Ann Intern Med 
2024;177:JC16 
219. Varady KA, Cienfuegos S, Ezpeleta M, Gabel 
K. Clinical application of intermittent fasting for 
weight loss: progress and future directions. Nat 
RevEndocrinol 2022;18:309–321 
220. Al-Arouj M, Assaad-Khalil S, Buse J, et al. 
Recommendations for management of diabetes 
during Ramadan: update 2010. Diabetes Care 
2010;33:1895–1902 
221. Grajower MM. Management of diabetes 
mellitus on Yom Kippur and other Jewish fast days. 
Endocr Pract 2008;14:305–311 
222. Gupta N, Gusdorf J. Guidance for physicians 
on the Yom Kippur fast. Georgetown Medical 
Review 2023;7 
223. Saboo B, Joshi S, Shah SN, et al. Manage­
ment of diabetes during fasting and feasting in 
India. J Assoc Physicians India 2019;67:70–77 
224. HassaneinM,AfandiB,YakoobAhmedaniM, 
et al. Diabetes and Ramadan: practical guidelines 
2021. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2022;185:109185 
225. Deeb A, Babiker A, Sedaghat S, et al. ISPAD 
Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2022: 
Ramadan and other religious fasting by young 
people with diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23: 
1512–1528 
226. Noor SK, Alutol MT, FadAllah FSA, et al. Risk 
factors associated with fasting during Ramadan 
among individuals with diabetes according to IDF­
DAR risk score in Atbara city, Sudan: cross-sectional 
hospital-based study. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2023; 
17:102743 
227. Mohammed N, Buckley A, Siddiqui M, et al. 
Validation of the new IDF-DAR risk assessment tool 
for Ramadan fasting in patients with diabetes. 
Diabetes Metab Syndr 2023;17:102754 
228. Alfadhli EM, Alharbi TS, Alrotoie AM, et al. 
Validity of the International Diabetes Federation 
risk stratiﬁcation score of Ramadan fasting in 
individuals with diabetes mellitus. Saudi Med J 
2024;45:86–92 
229. Shamsi N, Naser J, Humaidan H, et al. 
Veriﬁcation of 2021 IDF-DAR risk assessment tool 
for fasting Ramadan in patients with diabetes 
attending primary health care in The Kingdom 
of Bahrain: the DAR-BAH study. Diabetes Res Clin 
Pract 2024;211:111661 
230. Hassanein M, Hussein Z, Shaltout I, etal.The 
DAR 2020 global survey: Ramadan fasting during 
COVID 19 pandemic and the impact of older age 
on fasting among adults with type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;173:108674 
231. Yousuf S, Syed A, Ahmedani MY. To explore 
the association of Ramadan fasting with symptoms 
of depression, anxiety, and stress in people with 
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;172:108545 
232. Hassanein M, Bashier A, Randeree H, et al. 
Use of SGLT2 inhibitors during Ramadan: an expert 
panel statement. DiabetesRes Clin Pract 2020;169: 
108465 
233. Hassanein M, Abdelgadir E, Bashier A, et al. 
The role of optimum diabetes care in form 
of Ramadan focused diabetes education, ﬂash 
glucose monitoring system and pre-Ramadan dose 
adjustments in the safety of Ramadan fasting in 
high risk patients with diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin 
Pract 2019;150:288–295 
234. Afandi B, Hassanein M, Roubi S, Nagelkerke 
N.The value of continuous glucose monitoring and 
self-monitoring of blood glucose in patients with 
gestational diabetes mellitus during Ramadan 
fasting.Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2019;151:260–264 
235. GigliottiL,WarshawH,EvertA,etal.Incretin­
based therapies and lifestyle interventions: the 
evolving role of registered dietitian nutritionists in 
obesitycare. J Acad Nutr Diet 2025;125:408–421 
236. Mozaffarian D, Agarwal M, Aggarwal M, et 
al. Nutritional priorities to support GLP-1 therapy 
for obesity: a joint advisory from the American 
College of Lifestyle Medicine, the American 
Society for Nutrition, the Obesity Medicine 
Association, and the Obesity Society. Am J 
Lifestyle Med 2025:15598276251344827 
237. Hummell AC, Cummings M. Role of the 
nutrition-focused physical examination in identi­
fying malnutrition and its effectiveness. Nutr Clin 
Pract 2022;37:41–49 
238. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Economic 
Research Service. Household Food Security in 
the United States in 2023. Accessed 6 August 
2025. Available from https://www.ers.usda.gov/ 
publications/pub-details?pubid=109895 
239. Whitehouse CR, Akyirem S, Petoskey C, et al. 
A systematic review of interventions that address 
food insecurity for persons with prediabetes 
or diabetes using the RE-AIM Framework. Sci 
Diabetes Self Manag Care 2024;50:141–166 
240. Hager ER, Quigg AM, Black MM, et al. 
Development and validity of a 2-item screen to 
identify families at risk for food insecurity. Pediatrics 
2010;126:e26–e32 
241. Sluik D, Buijsse B, Muckelbauer R, et al. 
Physical activity and mortality in individuals with 
diabetes mellitus: a prospective study and meta­
analysis.ArchInternMed2012;172:1285–1295 
242. Tikkanen-Dolenc H, Wadén J, Forsblom C, et 
al.; FinnDiane Study Group. Physical activity 
reduces risk of premature mortality in patients 
with type 1 diabetes with and without kidney 
disease. Diabetes Care 2017;40:1727–1732 
243. Wang Y, Lee D-C, Brellenthin AG, et al. 
Leisure-time running reduces the risk of incident 
type 2 diabetes. Am J Med 2019;132:1225–1232 
244. Pai L-W, Li T-C, Hwu Y-J, Chang S-C, Chen L-L, 
Chang P-Y.The effectiveness of regular leisure-time 
physical activities on long-term glycemic control in 
people with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2016; 
113:77–85 
245. Munshi MN, Venditti EM, Tjaden AH, et al. 
Long-term impact of Diabetes Prevention Program 
interventions on walking endurance. Front Public 
Health 2024;12:1470035 
246. Ostman C, Jewiss D, King N, Smart NA. 
Clinical outcomes to exercise training in type 1 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2018;139:380–391 
247. Boulé NG, Haddad E, Kenny GP, Wells GA, 
Sigal RJ. Effects of exercise on glycemic control and 
body mass in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a meta-
analysis of controlled clinical trials. JAMA 2001; 
286:1218–1227 
248. Martland R, Mondelli V, Gaughran F, Stubbs 
B. Can high-intensity interval training improve 
physical and mental health outcomes? A meta-
review of 33 systematic reviews across the lifespan. 
JSportsSci 2020;38:430–469 
249. Pandey A, Patel KV, Bahnson JL, et al.; Look 
AHEAD Research Group. Association of intensive 
lifestyle intervention, ﬁtness, and body mass index 
with risk of heart failure in overweight or obese 
adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: an analysis 
from the Look AHEAD trial. Circulation 2020;141: 
1295–1306 
250. Rejeski WJ, Ip EH, Bertoni AG, et al.; Look 
AHEAD Research Group. Lifestyle change and 
mobility in obese adults with type 2 diabetes. N 
EnglJ Med2012;366:1209–1217 
251. Mohammad Rahimi GR, Aminzadeh R, 
Azimkhani A, Saatchian V. The effect of exercise 
interventions to improve psychosocial aspects and 
glycemic control in type 2 diabetic patients: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of rando­
mized controlled trials. Biol Res Nurs 2022;24: 
10–23 
252. Laosa O,TopinkovaE,Bourdel-Marchasson I, 
et al.; MIDFRAIL Consortium. Long-term frailty and 
physical performance transitions in older people 
with type-2 diabetes. The MIDFRAIL randomized 
clinical study. J Nutr Health Aging 2025;29:100512 
253. ArshA,AfaqS,CarswellC,BhattiMM,UllahI, 
Siddiqi N. Effectiveness of physical activity in 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S123 
managing co-morbid depression in adults with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J AffectDisord 2023;329:448–459 
254. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans, 
2nd ed. Accessed 5 August 2025. Available from 
https://health.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/2019-09/ 
Physical_Activity_Guidelines_2nd_edition.pdf 
255. Colberg SR, Sigal RJ,Yardley JE, etal. Physical 
activity/exercise and diabetes: a position state­
ment of the American Diabetes Association. Dia­
betes Care 2016;39:2065–2079 
256. Nelson KM, Reiber G, Boyko EJ. Diet and 
exercise among adults with type 2 diabetes: 
ﬁndings from the third national health and nutri­
tion examination survey (NHANES III). Diabetes 
Care 2002;25:1722–1728 
257. Frediani JK, Bienvenida AF, Li J, Higgins MK, 
Lobelo F. Physical ﬁtness and activity changes after 
a 24-week soccer-based adaptation of the U.S 
diabetes prevention program intervention in 
Hispanic men. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 2020;63: 
775–785 
258. Taylor JD, Fletcher JP, Tiarks J. Impact of 
physical therapist-directed exercise counseling 
combined with ﬁtness center-based exercise 
training on muscular strength and exercise 
capacity in people with type 2 diabetes: a 
randomized clinical trial. Phys Ther 2009;89: 
884–892 
259. Umpierre D, Ribeiro PAB, Kramer CK, et al. 
Physical activity advice only or structured exercise 
training and association with HbA1c levels in type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
JAMA 2011;305:1790–1799 
260. Schwingshackl L, Missbach B, Dias S, König J, 
Hoffmann G. Impact of different training 
modalities on glycaemic control and blood lipids 
in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic 
review and network meta-analysis. Diabetologia 
2014;57:1789–1797 
261. Yardley JE, Hay J, Abou-Setta AM, Marks SD, 
McGavock J. A systematic review and meta-
analysis of exercise interventions in adults with 
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2014;106: 
393–400 
262. Kennedy A, Nirantharakumar K, Chimen M, 
et al. Does exercise improve glycaemic control in 
type 1 diabetes? A systematic review and meta-
analysis. PLoS One 2013;8:e58861 
263. Sigal RJ, Yardley JE, Perkins BA, et al.; READI 
Trial Investigators. The Resistance Exercise in 
Already Active Diabetic Individuals (READI) rando­
mized clinical trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2023; 
108:e63–e75 
264. Riddell MC, Li Z, Gal RL, et al.; T1DEXI Study 
Group. Examining the acute glycemic effects of 
different types of structured exercise sessions in 
type 1 diabetes in a real-world setting: the Type 1 
Diabetes and Exercise Initiative (T1DEXI). Diabetes 
Care 2023;46:704–713 
265. Turner LV, Marak MC, Gal RL, et al.; T1DEXI 
Study Group. Associations between daily step 
count classiﬁcations and continuous glucose moni­
toring metrics in adults with type 1 diabetes: 
analysis of the Type 1 Diabetes Exercise Initiative 
(T1DEXI) cohort. Diabetologia 2024;67:1009–1022 
266. MoserO,ZaharievaDP,AdolfssonP,etal.The 
use of automated insulin delivery around physical 
activity and exercise in type 1 diabetes: a position 
statement of the European Association for the 
Study of Diabetes (EASD) and the International 
Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes 
(ISPAD). Diabetologia 2025;68:255–280 
267. Peters Al, Laffel L. The American Diabetes 
Association/JDRF Type 1 Diabetes Sourcebook. 
Arlington, VA, American Diabetes Association, 
2013 
268. Davenport MH, Ruchat S-M, Poitras VJ, et al. 
Prenatal exercise for the prevention of gestational 
diabetes mellitus and hypertensive disorders of 
pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Br J Sports Med2018;52:1367–1375 
269. Davenport MH, Sobierajski F, Mottola MF, et 
al. Glucose responsesto acute and chronic exercise 
during pregnancy: a systematic review and meta­
analysis.BrJ Sports Med 2018;52:1357–1366 
270. Bax JJ, Young LH, Frye RL, Bonow RO, 
Steinberg HO, Barrett EJ. Screening for coronary 
artery disease in patients with diabetes. Diabetes 
Care 2007;30:2729–2736 
271. Finn M, Sherlock M, Feehan S, Guinan EM, 
Moore
KB.
 Adherence
to
 physical
 activity
 
recommendations and barriers to physical activity 
participation among adults with type 1 diabetes. Ir 
J MedSci 2022;191:1639–1646 
272. ReynoldsAN,MoodieI,VennB,MannJ.How 
do we support walking prescriptions for type 2 
diabetes management? Facilitators and barriers 
following a 3-month prescription. J Prim Health 
Care 2020;12:173–180 
273. Zhao G, Ford ES, Li C, Mokdad AH. 
Compliance with physical activity recommen­
dations in US adults with diabetes. Diabet Med 
2008;25:221–227 
274.  Jarvie  JL, Pandey  A, Ayers  CR, et  al.  Aerobic  
ﬁtness and adherence to guideline-recommended 
minimum physical activity among ambulatory 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 
Care 2019;42:1333–1339 
275. Armstrong M, Colberg SR, Sigal RJ. Where to 
start? Physical assessment, readiness, and exercise 
recommendations for people with type 1 or type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Spectr 2023;36:105–113 
276. Katzmarzyk PT, Church TS, Craig CL, 
Bouchard C. Sitting time and mortality from all 
causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. Med 
Sci Sports Exerc 2009;41:998–1005 
277. Dempsey PC, Larsen RN, Sethi P, et al. 
Beneﬁts for type 2 diabetes of interrupting 
prolonged sitting with brief bouts of light walking 
or simple resistance activities. Diabetes Care 2016; 
39:964–972 
278. Campbell MD, Alobaid AM, Hopkins M, et al. 
Interrupting prolonged sitting with frequent short 
bouts of light-intensity activity in people with 
type 1 diabetes improves glycaemic control 
without increasing hypoglycaemia: the SIT-LESS 
randomised controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 
2023;25:3589–3598 
279. Taylor FC, Dunstan DW, Homer AR, et al. 
Acute effects of interrupting prolonged sitting on 
vascular function in type 2 diabetes. Am J Physiol 
Heart Circ Physiol 2021;320:H393–H403 
280. Janssen I, Leblanc AG. Systematic review of 
the health beneﬁts of physical activity and ﬁtness 
in school-aged children and youth. Int J Behav Nutr 
Phys Act 2010;7:40 
281. Savoye M, Caprio S, Dziura J, et al. Reversal of 
early abnormalities in glucose metabolism in 
obese youth: results of an intensive lifestyle 
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2014; 
37:317–324 
282. Harnois-Leblanc S, Sylvestre M-P, Van Hulst 
A, et al. Estimating causal effects of physical 
activity and sedentary behaviours on the develo­
pment of type 2 diabetes in at-risk children from 
childhood to late adolescence: an analysis of the 
QUALITY cohort. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 
2023;7:37–46 
283. García-Hermoso A, López-Gil JF, Ezzatvar Y, 
Ramírez-Vélez R, Izquierdo M. Twenty-four-hour 
movement guidelines during middle adolescence 
and their association with glucose outcomes and 
type 2 diabetes mellitus in adulthood. J Sport 
Health Sci 2023;12:167–174 
284. SlaghtJL,Wicklow BA,DartAB,etal. Physical 
activity and cardiometabolic health in adolescents 
with type 2 diabetes: a cross-sectional study. BMJ 
OpenDiabetes Res Care 2021;9:e002134 
285. Huerta-Uribe N, Ramírez-Vélez R, Izquierdo 
M, García-Hermoso A. Association between 
physical activity, sedentary behavior and physical 
ﬁtness and glycated hemoglobin in youth with 
type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and meta­
analysis.Sports Med 2023;53:111–123 
286. Quirk H, Blake H, Tennyson R, Randell TL, 
Glazebrook C. Physical activity interventions in 
children and young people with Type 1 diabetes 
mellitus: a systematic review with meta-analysis. 
Diabet Med2014;31:1163–1173 
287. Adolfsson P, Taplin CE, Zaharieva DP, et al. 
ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2022: 
exercise in children and adolescents with diabetes. 
Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:1341–1372 
288. Anderson BJ, Laffel LM, Domenger C, et al. 
Factors associated with diabetes-speciﬁc health­
related quality of life in youth with type 1 diabetes: 
the Global TEENs Study. Diabetes Care 2017;40: 
1002–1009 
289. Gortmaker SL, Must A, Sobol AM, Peterson 
K, Colditz GA, Dietz WH. Television viewing as a 
cause of increasing obesity among children in the 
United States, 1986-1990. Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med 1996;150:356–362 
290. de Jong E, Visscher TLS, HiraSing RA, 
Heymans MW, Seidell JC, Renders CM. Association 
between TV viewing, computer use and over­
weight, determinants and competing activities of 
screen time in 4-to 13-year-old children. Int J Obes 
(Lond) 2013;37:47–53 
291. Hardy LL, Denney-Wilson E, Thrift AP, Okely 
AD, Baur LA. Screen time and metabolic risk factors 
among adolescents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 
2010;164:643–649 
292. Chimen M, Kennedy A, Nirantharakumar K, 
Pang TT, Andrews R, Narendran P. What are the 
health beneﬁts of physical activity in type 1 diabetes 
mellitus? A literature review. Diabetologia 2012;55: 
542–551 
293. Jelleyman C, Yates T, O’Donovan G, et al. 
The effects of high-intensity interval training on 
glucose regulation and insulin resistance: a meta-
analysis. Obes Rev 2015;16:942–961 
294. Little JP, Gillen JB, Percival ME, et al. Low-
volume high-intensity interval training reduces 
hyperglycemia and increases muscle mitochond­
rial capacity in patients with type 2 diabetes. J 
Appl Physiol (1985) 2011;111:1554–1560 
295.  Grace  A, Chan  E, Giallauria  F, Graham  PL,  
Smart NA. Clinical outcomes and glycaemic 
responses to different aerobic exercise training 
intensities in type II diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2017; 
16:37 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S124 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
296. Al-Mhanna SB, Franklin BA, Jakicic JM, et al. 
Impact of resistance training on cardiometabolic 
health-related indices in patients with type 2 
diabetes and overweight/obesity: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomised con-
trolled trials. Br J Sports Med 2025;59:733–746 
297. WanY,SuZ.Theimpactofresistanceexercise 
training on glycemic control among adults with 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Biol Res 
Nurs 2024;26:597–623 
298. Gordon BA, Benson AC, Bird SR, Fraser SF. 
Resistance training improves metabolic health in 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review. Diabetes Res 
Clin Pract 2009;83:157–175 
299. Liu Y, Ye W, Chen Q, Zhang Y, Kuo C-H, Korivi 
M. Resistance exercise intensity is correlated with 
attenuation of HbA1c and insulin in patients with 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2019; 
16:140 
300. Cui J, Yan J-H, Yan L-M, Pan L, Le J-J, Guo Y-Z. 
Effects of yoga in adults with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: a meta-analysis. J Diabetes Investig 2017; 
8:201–209 
301. Lee MS, Jun JH, Lim H-J, Lim H-S. A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of tai chi for treating 
type2 diabetes. Maturitas 2015;80:14–23 
302. Rees JL, Johnson ST, Boulé NG. Aquatic 
exercise for adults with type 2 diabetes: a meta-
analysis.Acta Diabetol 2017;54:895–904 
303. Chapman A, Meyer C, Renehan E, Hill KD, 
Browning CJ. Exercise interventions for the 
improvement of falls-related outcomes among 
older adults with diabetes mellitus: a systematic 
review and meta-analyses. J Diabetes Compli-
cations 2017;31:631–645 
304. Pfeifer LO, Botton CE, Diefenthaeler F, 
Umpierre D, Pinto RS. Effects of a power training 
program in the functional capacity, on body 
balance and lower limb muscle strength of elderly 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Sports Med Phys 
Fitness 2021;61:1529–1537 
305. Lee J, Kim D, Kim C. Resistance training for 
glycemic control, muscular strength, and lean body 
mass in old type 2 diabetic patients: a meta-
analysis.Diabetes Ther 2017;8:459–473 
306. Herriott MT, Colberg SR, Parson HK, Nunnold 
T, Vinik AI. Effects of 8 weeks of ﬂexibility and 
resistance training in older adults with type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2004;27:2988–2989 
307. Hollekim-Strand 
SM, 
Bjørgaas 
MR, 
Albrektsen G, Tjønna AE, Wisløff U, Ingul CB. 
High-intensity interval exercise effectively improves 
cardiac function in patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus and diastolic dysfunction: a randomized 
controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;64:1758–
1760
 
 
308. Madsen SM, Thorup AC, Overgaard K, 
Jeppesen PB. High intensity interval training 
improves glycaemic control and pancreatic β cell 
function of type 2 diabetes patients. PLoS One 
2015;10:e0133286 
309. Nieuwoudt S, Fealy CE, Foucher JA, et al. 
Functional high-intensity training improves 
pancreatic β-cell function in adults with type 2 
diabetes. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2017; 
313:E314–E320 
310. Riddell MC, Peters AL. Exercise in adults with 
type 1 diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2023; 
19:98–111 
311. Karstoft K,Winding K, Knudsen SH, et al.The 
effects of free-living interval-walking training on 
glycemic control, body composition, and physical 
ﬁtness in type 2 diabetic patients: a randomized, 
controlledtrial. Diabetes Care 2013;36:228–236 
312. Findikoglu G, Altinkapak A, Yaylali GF. Is 
isoenergetic high-intensity interval exercise superior 
to moderate-intensity continuous exercise for 
cardiometabolic risk factors in individuals with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus? A single-blinded rando-
mized controlled study. Eur J Sport Sci 2023;23: 
2086–2097 
313.  Aronson  R, Brown  RE, Li A , Riddell M
 C.
Optimal insulin correction factor in post-high-
intensity exercise hyperglycemia in adults with 
type 1 diabetes: the FITstudy. Diabetes Care 2019; 
42:10–16 
314. Kanaley JA, Colberg SR, Corcoran MH, et al. 
Exercise/physical activity in individuals with 
type 2 diabetes: a consensus statement from the 
American College of Sports Medicine. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc 2022;54:353–368 
315. Boppre G, Diniz-Sousa F, Veras L, et al. 
Impact of a multicomponent exercise training 
program on muscle strength after bariatric 
surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Obes Surg 
2024;34:1704–1716 
316. InG,TaskinHE,AlM,etal.Comparisonof12-
week ﬁtness protocols following bariatric surgery: 
aerobic exercise versus aerobic exercise and pro-
gressive resistance. Obes Surg 2021;31:1475–1484 
317. Herring LY, Stevinson C, Carter P, et al. The 
effects of supervised exercise training 12-24 
months after bariatric surgery on physical function 
and body composition: a randomised controlled 
trial.Int J Obes (Lond) 2017;41:909–916 
318. Bellicha A, Ciangura C, Roda C, et al. Effect of 
exercise training after bariatric surgery: a 5-year 
follow-up study of a randomized controlled trial. 
PLoS One 2022;17:e0271561 
319. Coen PM, Tanner CJ, Helbling NL, et al. 
Clinical trial demonstrates exercise following 
bariatric surgery improves insulin sensitivity. J Clin 
Invest 2015;125:248–257 
320. Carnero EA, Dubis GS, Hames KC, et al. 
Randomized trial reveals that physical activity and 
energy expenditure are associated with weight 
and body composition after RYGB. Obesity (Silver 
Spring) 2017;25:1206–1216 
321. Ingersen A, Schmücker M, Alexandersen C, 
et al. Effects of aerobic training and semaglutide 
treatment on pancreatic β-cell secretory function 
in patients with type 2 diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2023;108:2798–2811 
322. Jensen SBK, Juhl CR, Janus C, et al. Weight 
loss maintenance with exercise and liraglutide 
improves glucose tolerance, glucagon response, 
and beta cell function. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2023; 
31:977–989 
323. Sandsdal RM, Juhl CR, Jensen SBK, et al. 
Combination of exercise and GLP-1 receptor 
agonist treatment reduces severity of metabolic 
syndrome, abdominal obesity, and inﬂammation: 
a randomized controlled trial. Cardiovasc Diabetol 
2023;22:41 
324. Lundgren JR, Janus C, Jensen SBK, et al. 
Healthy weight loss maintenance with exercise, 
liraglutide, or both combined. N Engl J Med 2021; 
384:1719–1730 
325. Jorgensen PG, Jensen MT, Mensberg P, et al. 
Effect of exercise combined with glucagon-like 
peptide-1 receptor agonist treatment on cardiac 
 
function: a randomized double-blind placebo-
controlled clinical trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 
2017;19:1040–1044 
326. Moser O, Riddell MC, Eckstein ML, et al. 
Glucose management for exercise using con-
tinuous glucose monitoring (CGM) and inter-
mittently scanned CGM (isCGM) systems in type 1 
diabetes: position statement of the European 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD) and of 
the International Society for Pediatric and 
Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD) endorsed by JDRF 
and supported by the American Diabetes 
Association (ADA). Diabetologia 2020;63:2501–
2520
 
 
327. Rietz M, Lehr A, Mino E, et al. Physical 
activity and risk of major diabetes-related com-
plications in individuals with diabetes: a syste-
matic review and meta-analysis of observational 
studies.Diabetes Care 2022;45:3101–3111 
328. Colberg SR. Exercise and Diabetes: a 
Clinician’s Guide to Prescribing Physical Activity. 
Arlington, VA, American Diabetes Association, 
2013 
329. Hulshof CM, van Netten JJ, Pijnappels M, Bus 
SA. The role of foot-loading factors and their 
associations with ulcer development and ulcer 
healing in people with diabetes: a systematic 
review. J Clin Med 2020;9:3591 
330. Lemaster JW, Reiber GE, Smith DG, Heagerty 
PJ, Wallace C. Daily weight-bearing activity does 
not increase the riskof diabetic foot ulcers. MedSci 
Sports Exerc 2003;35:1093–1099 
331. Smith AG, Russell J, Feldman EL, et al. 
Lifestyle intervention for pre-diabetic neuropathy. 
Diabetes Care 2006;29:1294–1299 
332. Spallone V, Ziegler D, Freeman R, et al.; 
Toronto Consensus Panel on Diabetic Neuropathy. 
Cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy in diabetes: 
clinical impact, assessment, diagnosis, and man-
agement. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2011;27: 
639–653 
333. Pop-Busui R, Evans GW, Gerstein HC, et al.; 
Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes 
Study Group. Effects of cardiac autonomic 
dysfunction on mortality risk in the Action to 
Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) 
trial. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1578–1584 
334. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. Eliminating Tobacco-Related Disease and 
Death: Addressing Disparities. A Report of the 
Surgeon General. Accessed 6 August 2025. Avai-
lable from https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/
ﬁles/2024-sgr-tobacco-related-health-disparities-
full-report.pdf 
 
335. Sliwin ska-Mosson M
 
, M
 ilnerowicz H . T he
impact of smoking on the development ofdiabetes 
and its complications. Diab Vasc Dis Res 2017;14: 
265–276 
336. Pan A, Wang Y, Talaei M, Hu FB. Relation of 
smoking with total mortality and cardiovascular 
events among patients with diabetes mellitus: a 
meta-analysis and systematic review. Circulation 
2015;132:1795–1804 
337. Pan A, Wang Y, Talaei M, Hu FB, Wu T. 
Relation of active, passive, and quitting smoking 
with incident type 2 diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 
2015;3:958–967 
338. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. Smoking Cessation. A Report of the 
Surgeon General, 2020. Accessed 13 August 
 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S125 
2024. Available from https://www.hhs.gov/sites/
default/ﬁles/2020-cessation-sgr-full-report.pdf 
 
339. Loretan CG, Cornelius ME, Jamal A, Cheng YJ, 
Homa DM. Cigarette smoking among US adults 
with selected chronic diseases associated with 
smoking, 2010-2019. Prev Chronic Dis 2022; 
19:E62 
340. Rigotti NA, Kruse GR, Livingstone-Banks J, 
Hartmann-Boyce J.Treatment of tobacco smoking: 
areview. JAMA 2022;327:566–577 
341. World Health Organization. WHO clinical 
treatment guideline for tobacco cessation in 
adults. Accessed 8 September 2025. Available 
from https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/
9789240096431 
 
342. Rojewski AM, Palmer AM, Baker NL, Toll BA. 
Smoking cessation pharmacotherapy efﬁcacy in 
comorbid medical populations: secondary analysis 
of the Evaluating Adverse Events in a Global 
Smoking Cessation Study (EAGLES) randomized 
clinical trial. Nicotine Tob Res 2024;26:31–38 
343. Leone FT, Zhang Y, Evers-Casey S, et al. 
Initiating pharmacologic treatment in tobacco-
dependent adults. An ofﬁcial American Thoracic 
Society clinical practice guideline. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2020;202:e5–e31 
344.  Tian J, V enn A,  Otahal P ,  Gall S . T he a sso-
ciation between quitting smoking and weight gain: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of pro-
spective cohort studies. Obes Rev 2015;16: 
883–901 
345. Wang X, Qin L-Q, Arafa A, Eshak ES, Hu Y, 
Dong J-Y. Smoking cessation, weight gain, cardio-
vascular risk, and all-cause mortality: a meta-
analysis. Nicotine Tob Res 2021;23:1987–1994 
346. Hartmann-Boyce J, Theodoulou A, Farley A, 
et al. Interventions for preventing weight gain after 
smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2021;10:CD006219 
347. Yammine L, Green CE, Kosten TR, et al. 
Exenatide adjunct to nicotine patch facilitates 
smoking cessation and may reduce post-cessation 
weight gain: a pilot randomized controlled trial. 
Nicotine Tob Res 2021;23:1682–1690 
348. Asthana S, Labani S, Kailash U, Sinha DN, 
Mehrotra R. Association of smokeless tobacco use 
and oral cancer: a systematic global review and 
meta-analysis. Nicotine Tob Res 2019;21:1162–
1171 
 
349. Dennison Himmelfarb CR, Benowitz NL, 
Blank MD, et al.; American Heart Association 
Advocacy Coordinating Committee. Impact of 
smokeless oral nicotine products on cardiovascular 
disease: implications for policy, prevention, and 
treatment: a policy statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation 2025;151:e1–e21 
350. Huerta TR,Walker DM, Mullen D, Johnson TJ, 
Ford EW. Trends in e-cigarette awareness and 
perceived harmfulness in the U.S. Am J Prev Med 
2017;52:339–346 
351. Kiernan E, Click ES, Melstrom P, et al.; Lung 
Injury Response Clinical Task Force; Lung Injury 
Response Clinical Working Group. A brief overview 
of the national outbreak of e-cigarette, or vaping, 
product use-associated lung injury and the primary 
causes. Chest 2021;159:426–431 
352. Darville A, Hahn EJ. E-cigarettes and 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: what 
clinicians and researchers need to know. Curr 
Atheroscler Rep 2019;21:15 
353. Pierce JP, Benmarhnia T, Chen R, et al. Role 
of e-cigarettes and pharmacotherapy during 
attempts to quit cigarette smoking: the PATH 
Study2013-16. PLoS One 2020;15:e0237938 
354. Chen R, Pierce JP, Leas EC, et al. Use of 
electronic cigarettes to aid long-term smoking 
cessation in the United States: prospective 
evidence from the PATH cohort study. Am J 
Epidemiol 2020;189:1529–1537 
355. Reid RD, Malcolm J, Wooding E, et al. 
Prospective, cluster-randomized trial to imple-
ment the Ottawa model for smoking cessation in 
diabetes education programs in Ontario, Canada. 
Diabetes Care 2018;41:406–412 
356. Assaf RD, Gorbach PM, Cooper ZD. Changes 
in medical and non-medical cannabis use among 
United States adults before and during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 
2022;48:321–327 
357. Hasin D, Walsh C. Trends over time in adult 
cannabis use: a review of recent ﬁndings. Curr 
Opin Psychol 2021;38:80–85 
358.  Jadoon  KA, Ratcliffe S H, Barrett  DA, et a l
Efﬁcacy and safety of cannabidiol and tetra-
hydrocannabivarin on glycemic and lipid para-
meters in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
parallel group pilot study. Diabetes Care 2016;39: 
1777–1786 
359. Freeman TP, Craft S, Wilson J, et al. Changes 
in delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and can-
nabidiol (CBD) concentrations in cannabis over 
time: systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Addiction 2021;116:1000–1010 
360. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 5 Things 
to Know about Delta-8 Tetrahydrocannabinol-
Delta-8 THC, 2022. Accessed 6 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.fda.gov/consumers/
consumer-updates/5-things-know-about-delta-8-
tetrahydrocannabinol-delta-8-thc 
 
361. Akturk HK, Taylor DD, Camsari UM, Rewers 
A, Kinney GL, Shah VN. Association between 
cannabis use and risk for diabetic ketoacidosis in 
adults with type 1 diabetes. JAMA Intern Med 
2019;179:115–118 
362. Kinney GL, Akturk HK, Taylor DD, Foster NC, 
Shah VN. Cannabis use is associated with increased 
risk for diabetic ketoacidosis in adults with type 1 
diabetes: ﬁndings from the T1D Exchange Clinic 
Registry. Diabetes Care 2020;43:247–249 
363. Akturk HK, Snell-Bergeon J, Kinney GL, 
Champakanath 
A, 
Monte 
A, 
Shah 
VN. 
Differentiating diabetic ketoacidosis and hyper-
glycemic ketosis due to cannabis hyperemesis 
syndrome in adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 
Care 2022;45:481–483 
364. Hood KK, Rohan JM, Peterson CM, Drotar D. 
Interventions with adherence-promoting com-
ponents in pediatric type 1 diabetes: meta-analysis 
of their impact on glycemic control. Diabetes Care 
2010;33:1658–1664 
365. Asche C, LaFleur J, Conner C. A review of 
diabetes treatment adherence and the association 
with clinical and economic outcomes. Clin Ther 
2011;33:74–109 
366. Berhe KK, Gebru HB, Kahsay HB. Effect of 
motivational interviewing intervention on HgbA1C 
and depression in people with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (systematic review and meta-analysis). 
PLoS One 2020;15:e0240839 
367. Liang W, Lo SHS, Tola YO, Chow KM. The 
effectiveness ofself-management programmes for 
people with type 2 diabetes receiving insulin 
.  
injection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Int J Clin Pract 2021;75:e14636 
368. Almutairi N, Hosseinzadeh H, Gopaldasani V. 
The effectiveness of patient activation inter-
vention on type 2 diabetes mellitus glycemic 
control and self-management behaviors: a sys-
tematic review of RCTs. Prim Care Diabetes 2020; 
14:12–20 
369. Gray KE, Hoerster KD, Taylor L, Krieger J, 
Nelson KM. Improvements in physical activity and 
some dietary behaviors in a community health 
worker-led diabetes self-management inter-
vention for adults with low incomes: results from a 
randomized controlled trial. Transl Behav Med 
2021;11:2144–2154 
370. Van Rhoon L, Byrne M, Morrissey E, Murphy 
J, McSharry J. A systematic review of the behaviour 
change techniques and digital features in 
technology-driven type 2 diabetes prevention 
interventions. Digit Health 2020;6:20552076 
20914427 
371. Patton SR, Cushing CC, Lansing AH. Applying 
behavioral economics theories to interventions for 
persons with diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 2022;22: 
219–226 
372. Avery L, Flynn D, van Wersch A, Sniehotta FF, 
Trenell MI. Changing physical activity behavior in 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of behavioral interventions. Diabetes Care 
2012;35:2681–2689 
373. Hilliard ME, Powell PW, Anderson BJ. 
Evidence-based behavioral interventions to pro-
mote diabetes management in children, adole-
scents, and families. Am Psychol 2016;71:590–601 
374. Lake AJ, Bo A, Hadjiconstantinou M. 
Developing and evaluating behaviour change 
interventions for people with younger-onset 
type 2 diabetes: lessons and recommendations 
from existing programmes. Curr Diab Rep 2021; 
21:59 
375. Berlin KS, Klages KL, Banks GG, et al. Toward 
the development of a culturally humble inter-
vention to improve glycemic control and quality of 
life among adolescents with type-1 diabetes and 
their families. Behav Med 2021;47:99–110 
376. Nicolucci A, Haxhi J, D’Errico V, et al.; Italian 
Diabetes and Exercise Study 2 (IDES_2) In-
vestigators. Effect of a behavioural intervention for 
adoption and maintenance of a physically active 
lifestyle on psychological well-being and quality of 
life in patients with type 2 diabetes: the IDES_2 
randomized clinical trial. Sports Med 2022;52: 
643–654 
377. Crowley MJ, Tarkington PE, Bosworth HB, et 
al. Effect of a comprehensive telehealth 
intervention vs telemonitoring and care coordi-
nation in patients with persistently poor type 2 
diabetes control: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Intern Med 2022;182:943–952 
378. Harris MA, Freeman KA, Duke DC. Seeing 
is believing: using skype to improve diabetes 
outcomes in youth. Diabetes Care 2015;38:1427– 
1434 
379. Kaczmarek T, Kavanagh DJ, Lazzarini PA, 
Warnock J, Van Netten JJ. Training diabetes 
healthcare practitioners in motivational inter-
viewing: a systematic review. Health Psychol Rev 
2022;16:430–449 
380. Bell KJ, Barclay AW, Petocz P, Colagiuri S, 
Brand-Miller JC. Efﬁcacy of carbohydrate counting 
in type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S126 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014;2: 
133–140 
381. McVoy M, Hardin H, Fulchiero E, et al. 
Mental health comorbidity and youth onset type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review of the literature. Int J 
Psychiatry Med 2023;58:37–55 
382. Naicker K, Johnson JA, Skogen JC, et al.Type 2 
diabetes and comorbid symptoms of depression 
and anxiety: longitudinal associations with morta-
lity risk. Diabetes Care 2017;40:352–358 
383. Anderson RJ, Grigsby AB, Freedland KE, et al. 
Anxiety and poor glycemic control: a meta-analytic 
review of the literature. Int J Psychiatry Med 2002; 
32:235–247 
384. Anderson RJ, Freedland KE, Clouse RE, 
Lustman PJ. The prevalence of comorbid depres-
sion in adults with diabetes: a meta-analysis. 
Diabetes Care 2001;24:1069–1078 
385. Nicolucci A, Kovacs Burns K, Holt RIG, et al.; 
DAWN2 Study Group. Diabetes Attitudes, Wishes 
and Needs second study (DAWN2): cross-national 
benchmarking of diabetes-related psychosocial 
outcomes for people with diabetes. Diabet Med 
2013;30:767–777 
386. Guerrero Fernández de Alba I, Gimeno-
Miguel A, Poblador-Plou B, et al. Association 
between mental health comorbidity and health 
outcomes in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients. Sci 
Rep 2020;10:19583 
387. Gonzalvo JD, Hamm J, Eaves S, et al. A 
practical approach to mental health for the 
diabeteseducator.AADEPract2019;7:29–44 
388. Robinson DJ, Coons M, Haensel H, Vallis M, 
Yale J-F; Diabetes Canada Clinical Practice 
Guidelines Expert Committee. Diabetes and 
mental health. Can J Diabetes 2018;42(Suppl 1): 
S130–S141 
389. Cho M-K, Kim MY. Self-management nursing 
intervention for controlling glucose among dia-
betes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J 
Environ Res Public Health 2021;18:12750 
390. Majidi S, Reid MW, Fogel J, et al. Psychosocial 
outcomes in young adolescents with type 1 
diabetes participating in shared medical appoint-
ments. Pediatr Diabetes 2021;22:787–795 
391. Jiang S, Wu Z, Zhang X, et al. How does 
patient-centered communication inﬂuence patient 
trust?: the roles of patient participation and patient 
preference. PatientEducCouns 2024;122:108161 
392. Li Y, Storch EA, Ferguson S, Li L, Buys N, Sun J. 
The efﬁcacy of cognitive behavioral therapy-based 
intervention on patients with diabetes: a meta-
analysis.Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2022;189:109965 
393. Fisher L, Guzman S, Polonsky WH, Strycker L, 
Greenberg K, Hessler DM. How does addressing 
diabetes distress lead to positive glycemic change? 
Results from the EMBARK trial. Patient Educ 
Couns 2025:108748 
394. Phillips S, Culpepper J, Welch M, et al. A 
multidisciplinary diabetes clinic improves clinical 
and behavioral o utcomes i n a p rimary c are
setting. J Am Board Fam Med 2021;34:579–589 
395. Ali MK, Chwastiak L, Poongothai S, et al.; 
INDEPENDENT Study Group. Effect of a collabora-
tive care model on depressive symptoms and 
glycated hemoglobin, blood pressure, and serum 
cholesterol among patients with depression and 
diabetes in India: the INDEPENDENT randomized 
clinical trial.JAMA2020;324:651–662 
396. Rechenberg K, Koerner R. Cognitive 
behavioral therapy in adolescents with type 1 
diabetes: an integrative review. J Pediatr Nurs 
2021;60:190–197 
397. McMorrow R, Hunter B, Hendrieckx C, et al. 
Effect of routinely assessing and addressing 
depression and diabetes distress on clinical out-
comes among adults with type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review. BMJ Open 2022;12:e054650 
398. Corathers S, Williford DN, Kichler J, et al. 
Implementation of psychosocial screening into 
diabetes clinics: experience from the Type 1 Dia-
betes Exchange Quality Improvement Network. 
CurrDiab Rep 2023;23:19–28 
399. Brodar KE, Davis EM, Lynn C, et al. 
Comprehensive psychosocial screening in a 
pediatric diabetes clinic. Pediatr Diabetes 2021;22: 
656–666 
400. MyersAK,GrannemannBD,LingvayI,Trivedi 
MH. Brief report: depression and history of suicide 
attempts in adults with new-onset type 2 
diabetes. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2013;38: 
2810–2814 
401. Majidi S, O’Donnell HK, Stanek K,Youngkin E, 
Gomer T, Driscoll KA. Suicide risk assessment in 
youth and young adults with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2020;43:343–348 
402. Barnard-Kelly KD, Naranjo D, Majidi S, et al. 
Suicide and self-inﬂicted injury in diabetes: a 
balancing act. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14: 
1010–1016 
403. Hill RM, Gallagher KAS, Eshtehardi SS, Uysal 
S, Hilliard ME. Suicide risk in youth and young 
adults with type 1 diabetes: a review of the 
literature and clinical recommendations for pre-
vention. Curr Diab Rep 2021;21:51 
404. Huang C-J, Huang Y-T, Lin P-C, Hsieh H-M, 
Yang Y-H. Mortality and suicide related to major 
depressive disorder before and after type 2 
diabetes mellitus. J Clin Psychiatry 2022;83: 
20m13692 
405. Mulvaney SA, Mara CA, Kichler JC, et al. A 
retrospective multisite examination of depression 
screening practices, scores, and correlates in 
pediatric diabetes care.Transl Behav Med 2021;11: 
122–131 
406. Marker AM, Patton SR, Clements MA, Egan 
AE, McDonough RJ. Adjusted cutoff scores 
increase sensitivity of depression screening 
measures in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2022;45:2501–2508 
407. Weissberg-Benchell J, Shapiro JB. A review of 
interventions aimed at facilitating successful 
transition planning and transfer to adult care 
among youth with chronic illness. Pediatr Ann 
2017;46:e182–e187 
408. O’Gurek DT, Henke C. A practical approach to 
screening for social determinants of health. Fam 
Pract Manag 2018;25:7–12 
409. Zhang H, Zhang Q, Luo D, et al. The effect of 
family-based intervention for adults with diabetes 
on HbA1c and other health-related outcomes: 
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Nurs 
 2022;31:1488–1501 
410. OyedejiAD,Ullah I,Weich S,BentallR,Booth 
A. Effectiveness of non-specialist delivered psy-
chological interventions on glycemic control and 
mental health problems in individuals with type 2 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Int J Ment Health Syst 2022;16:9 
411. Beverly EA, Hultgren BA, Brooks KM, Ritholz 
MD, Abrahamson MJ, Weinger K. Understanding 
physicians’ challenges when treating type 2 
diabetic patients’ social and emotional difﬁculties: 
a qualitative study. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1086– 
1088 
412. Vlachou E, Ntikoudi A, Owens DA, 
Nikolakopoulou M, Chalimourdas T, Cauli O. 
Effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy-
based interventions on psychological symptoms in 
adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus: an update 
review of randomized controlled trials. J Diabetes 
Complications 2022;36:108185 
413. Ni Y-X, Ma L, Li J-P. Effects of mindfulness-
based intervention on glycemic control and 
psychological outcomes in people with diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Diabetes 
Investig 2021;12:1092–1103 
414. Hood KK, Iturralde E, Rausch J, Weissberg-
Benchell J. Preventing diabetes distress in adole-
scents with type 1 diabetes: results 1 year after 
participation in the STePS program. Diabetes Care 
2018;41:1623–1630 
415. Weissberg-Benchell J, Shapiro JB, Bryant FB, 
Hood KK. Supporting Teen Problem-Solving 
(STEPS) 3 year outcomes: preventing diabetes-
speciﬁc emotional distress and depressive 
symptoms in adolescents with type 1 diabetes. J 
Consult Clin Psychol 2020;88:1019–1031 
416. Laffel LMB, Vangsness L, Connell A, Goebel-
Fabbri A, Butler D, Anderson BJ. Impact of 
ambulatory, family-focused teamwork interven-
tion on glycemic control in youth with type 1 
diabetes. J Pediatr 2003;142:409–416 
417. Wysocki T, Harris MA, Buckloh LM, et al. 
Effects of behavioral family systems therapy for 
diabetes on adolescents’ family relationships, 
treatment adherence, and metabolic control. J 
Pediatr Psychol 2006;31:928–938 
418. YakubuTI,PawerS,WestNC,TangTS,Görges 
M. Impact of digitally enabled peer support 
interventions on diabetes distress and depressive 
symptoms in people living with type 1 diabetes: a 
systematic review. Curr DiabRep2024;25:1 
419. Yap JM, Tantono N, Wu VX, Klainin-Yobas P. 
Effectiveness of technology-based psychosocial 
interventions on diabetes distress and health-
relevant outcomes among type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Telemed Telecare 2024;30:262–284 
420. Bisno DI, Reid MW, Fogel JL, Pyatak EA, 
Majidi S, Raymond JK. Virtual group appointments 
reduce distress and improve care management 
in young adults with type 1 diabetes. J Diabetes 
Sci Technol 2022;16:1419–1427 
421. Fisher L, Guzman S, Polonsky W, Hessler D. 
Bringing the assessment and treatment ofdiabetes 
distress into the real world of clinical care: time for 
a shift in perspective. Diabet Med 2024;41:e15446 
422. Hagger V, Hendrieckx C, Sturt J, Skinner TC, 
Speight J. Diabetes distress among adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Curr 
Diab Rep2016;16:9 
423. Wojujutari Ajele K, Sunday Idemudia E. The 
role ofdepression and diabetes distress in glycemic 
control: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 
2025;221:112014 
424. Dalsgaard E-M, Graversen SB, Bjerg L, 
Sandbaek A, Laurberg T. Diabetes distress and 
depression in type 2 diabetes. A cross-sectional 
study in 18,000 individuals in the Central Denmark 
region. Diabet Med 2025;42:e15463 
425. Fisher L, Polonsky WH, Perez-Nieves M, 
Desai U, Strycker L, Hessler D. A new perspective 
on diabetes distress using the Type 2 Diabetes 
Distress Assessment System (T2-DDAS): prevalence 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S127 
and change over time. J Diabetes Complications 
2022;36:108256 
426. Hessler DM, Polonsky WH, Strycker L, 
Naranjo D, Greenberg K, Fisher L. Stability and 
impact ofdiabetes distress over time: the potential 
value and uses of the Type 1 Diabetes Distress 
Assessment System (T1-DDAS). Diabet Med 2025; 
42:e70066 
427. Aikens JE. Prospective associations between 
emotional distress and poor outcomes in type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2012;35:2472–2478 
428. McCarty T, Inverso H, Streisand R, et al. 
Diabetes distress among caregivers of adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes. J Pediatr Psychol. 11 July 
2025 [Epub ahead of print]. 
429. Gonzalez JS, Krause-Steinrauf H, Bebu I, et 
al.; GRADE Research Group. Emotional distress, 
self-management, and glycemic control among 
participants enrolled in the Glycemia Reduction 
Approaches in Diabetes: a Comparative Effective-
ness (GRADE) study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023; 
196:110229 
430. Liu X, Haagsma J, Sijbrands E, et al. Anxiety 
and depression in diabetes care: longitudinal 
associations with health-related quality of life. Sci 
Rep 2020;10:8307 
431. Guo X, Wu S, Tang H, et al. The relationship 
between stigma and psychological distress among 
people with diabetes: a meta-analysis. BMC 
Psychol 2023;11:242 
432. Akyirem S, Ekpor E, Namumbejja Abwoye D, 
Batten J, Nelson LE. Type 2 diabetes stigma 
and its association with clinical, psychological, and 
behavioral outcomes: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;202: 
110774 
433. Hamilton K, Forde R, Due-Christensen M, et 
al. Which diabetes speciﬁc patient reported 
outcomes should be measured in routine care? A 
systematic review to inform a core outcome set for 
adults with type 1 and 2 diabetes mellitus: the 
European Health Outcomes Observatory (H2O) 
programme. Patient Educ Couns 2023;116:107933 
434. Michot AP, Evans TL, Vasudevan MM, et al. 
The case for screening for diabetes distress, 
depression, and anxiety. J Health Psychol 2024;29: 
1608–1613 
435. Franc S, Charpentier G. Emotional distress as 
a therapeutic target against persistent poor 
glycaemic control in subjects with type 1 diabetes: 
a systematic review. Diabetes Obes Metab 2025; 
27:4662–4673 
436. Hu H, Kuang L, Dai H, Sheng Y. Effectiveness 
of nurse-led psychological interventions on dia-
betes distress, depression, and glycemic control in 
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Psychosoc 
Nurs Ment Health Serv 2025;63:11–18 
437. Zu W,ZhangS,Du L,HuangX,Nie W,Wang L. 
The effectiveness of psychological interventions 
on diabetes distress and glycemic level in adults 
with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry 2024;24:660 
438. Gutiérrez-Domingo T, Farhane-Medina NZ, 
Villaécija J, et al. Effectiveness of mindfulness-
based interventions with respect to psychological 
and biomedical outcomes in young people with 
type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Healthcare 
(Basel) 2024;12:1876 
439. Ngan HY, Chong YY, Chien WT. Effects of 
mindfulness- and acceptance-based interventions 
on diabetes distress and glycaemic level in people 
with type 2 diabetes: systematic review and meta-
analysis.Diabet Med 2021;38:e14525 
440. Roddy MK, Spieker AJ, Nelson LA, et al. Well-
being outcomes of a family-focused intervention 
for persons with type 2 diabetes and support 
persons: main, mediated, and subgroup effects 
from the FAMS 2.0 RCT. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 
2023;204:110921 
441.  Hessler  DM, Fisher L, Guzman  S, et a l.
EMBARK: a randomized, controlled trial comparing 
three approaches to reducing diabetes distress 
and improving HbA1c in adults with type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1370–1378 
442. WicaksanaAL,ApriliyasariRW,TsaiP-S.Effect 
of self-help interventions on psychological, gly-
cemic, and behavioral outcomes in patients with 
diabetes: a meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolledtrials.Int J Nurs Stud 2024;149:104626 
443. Fisher L, Hessler D, Glasgow RE, et al. 
REDEEM: a pragmatic trial to reduce diabetes 
distress. Diabetes Care2013;36:2551–2558 
444. Tay JHT, Jiang Y, Hong J, He H, Wang W. 
Effectiveness of lay-led, group-based self-
management interventions to improve glycated 
hemoglobin (HbA1c), self-efﬁcacy, and emergency 
visit rates among adults with type 2 diabetes: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Nurs 
Stud 2021;113:103779 
445. DiNardo MM, Greco C, Phares AD, et al. 
Effects of an integrated mindfulness intervention 
for veterans with diabetes distress: a randomized 
controlled trial. BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2022; 
10:e002631 
446. Lutes LD, Cummings DM, Littlewood K, et al. 
A tailored cognitive-behavioural intervention 
produces comparable reductions in regimen-
related distress in adults with type 2 diabetes 
regardless of insulin use: 12-month outcomes 
from the COMRADE trial. Can J Diabetes 2020;44: 
530–536 
447. Friis AM, Johnson MH, Cutﬁeld RG, 
Consedine NS. Kindness Matters: a randomized 
controlled trial of a mindful self-compassion inter-
vention improves depression, distress, and HbA1c 
among patients with diabetes. Diabetes Care 
2016;39:1963–1971 
448. Canha D, McMahon V, Schmitz S, et al. The 
effect of automated insulin delivery system use on 
diabetes distress in people with type 1 diabetes 
and their caregivers: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Diabet Med 2025;42:e15503 
449. Roos T, Hermanns N, Groß C, Kulzer B, Haak 
T, Ehrmann D. Effect of automated insulin delivery 
systems on person-reported outcomes in people 
with diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis.EClinicalMedicine 2024;76:102852 
450. Lin EHB, Von Korff M, Alonso J, et al. Mental 
disorders among persons with diabetes-results 
from the World Mental Health Surveys. J Psy-
chosom Res 2008;65:571–580 
451. MershaAG,TollosaDN,BagadeT,EftekhariP. 
A bidirectional relationship between diabetes 
mellitus and anxiety: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Psychosom Res 2022;162:110991 
452. Gonder-Frederick LA, Schmidt KM,Vajda KA, 
et al. Psychometric properties of the hypoglycemia 
fear survey-ii for adults with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2011;34:801–806 
453. Wild
 
D ,
v on
Maltzahn
R,
B rohan
E,
Christensen T, Clauson P, Gonder-Frederick L. A 
critical review of the literature on fear of hypo-
glycemia in diabetes: implications for diabetes 
management and patient education. Patient Educ 
Couns 2007;68:10–15 
454. Alazmi A, Bashiru MB, Viktor S, Erjavec M. 
Psychological variables and lifestyle in children 
with type1 diabetes and their parents: a syste-
matic review. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry 2024; 
29:1174–1194 
455. Zhang L, Xu H, Liu L, et al. Related factors 
 associated with fear of hypoglycemia in parents of 
children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes—a 
systematicreview. J Pediatr Nurs 2022;66:125–135 
456. Smith KJ, Béland M, Clyde M, et al. 
Association of diabetes with anxiety: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Psychosom Res 2013; 
74:89–99 
457. Zambanini A, Newson RB, Maisey M, Feher 
MD. Injection related anxiety in insulin-treated 
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 1999;46:239–246 
458. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5. 
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, 
2013 
459. Mollema ED, Snoek FJ, Adèr HJ, Heine RJ, van 
der Ploeg HM. Insulin-treated diabetes patients 
with fear of self-injecting or fear of self-testing: 
psychological comorbidity and general well-being. 
J Psychosom Res 2001;51:665–672 
460. Kemp CG, Johnson LCM, Sagar R, et al. Effect 
of a collaborative care model on anxiety symptoms 
among p atients w ith depression  and diabetes i n
India: the INDEPENDENT randomized clinical trial. 
Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2022;74:39–45 
461. Abbas Q, Latif S, Ayaz Habib H, et al. 
Cognitive behavior therapy for diabetes distress, 
depression, health anxiety, quality of life and 
treatment adherence among patients with type-II 
diabetes mellitus: a randomized control trial. BMC 
Psychiatry 2023;23:86 
462. Talbo MK, Katz A, Hill L, Peters TM, Yale J-F, 
Brazeau A-S. Effect of diabetes technologies on 
the fear of hypoglycaemia among people living 
with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.EClinicalMedicine 2023;62:102119 
463. Martyn-Nemeth P, Duffecy J, Quinn L, et al. 
FREE: a randomized controlled feasibility trial of a 
cognitive behavioral therapy and technology-
assisted intervention to reduce fear of hypo-
glycemia in young adults with type 1 diabetes. J 
Psychosom Res 2024;181:111679 
464. Wulandari N, Lamuri A, van Hasselt F, 
Feenstra T, Taxis K. The burden of depression 
among patients with type 2 diabetes: an umbrella 
review of systematic reviews. J Diabetes Comp-
lications 2025;39:109004 
465. Chen Z, Wang J, Carru C, Coradduzza D, Li Z. 
The prevalence of depression among parents of 
children/adolescents with type 1 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Front Endo-
crinol (Lausanne)2023;14:1095729 
466.  Damilano C P, Hong K MC, Glick  BA, Kamboj
MK, Hoffman RP. Diabetes distress, depression, 
and future glycemic control among adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 
2025;38:311–317 
467. Tu Q, Hyun K, Lin S, et al. Individual and joint 
effects of diabetes and depression on incident 
cardiovascular diseases and all-cause mortality: 
 esults from a population-based cohort study. J 
Diabetes Complications 2024;38:108878 
468. de Groot M, Crick KA, Long M, Saha C, 
Shubrook JH. Lifetime duration of depressive 
 
 
r
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
S128 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
disorders in patients with type 2 diabetes. Dia-
betesCare 2016;39:2174–2181 
469. Rubin RR, Ma Y, Marrero DG, et al.; Diabetes 
Prevention Program Research Group. Elevated 
depression symptoms, antidepressant medicine 
use, and risk of developing diabetes during the 
diabetes prevention program. Diabetes Care 2008; 
31:420–426 
470. Zheng C, Yin J, Wu L, et al. Association 
between depression and diabetes among 
American adults using NHANES data from 2005 
to 2020. Sci Rep 2024;14:27735 
471. Farooqi A, Gillies C, Sathanapally H, et al. A 
systematic review and meta-analysis to compare 
the prevalence of depression between people with 
and without type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Prim Care 
Diabetes 2022;16:1–10 
472. Monaghan M, Mara CA, Kichler JC, et al. 
Multisite examination of depression screening 
scores and correlates among adolescents and 
young adults with type 2 diabetes. Can J Diabetes 
2021;45:411–416 
473. Rosas CE, Talavera GA, Roesch SC, et al. 
Randomized trial of an integrated care inter-
vention among Latino adults: sustained effects on 
diabetes management.Transl Behav Med 2024;14: 
310–318 
474. Lu X, Yang D, Liang J, et al. Effectiveness of 
intervention program on the change of glycaemic 
control i n d iabetes w ith depression patients:  a  
meta-analysis of randomized controlled studies. 
Prim Care Diabetes 2021;15:428–434 
475. Ellis D, Carcone AI, Templin T, et al. 
Moderating effect of depression on glycemic 
control in an ehealth intervention among black 
youth with type 1 
d iabetes: ﬁ ndings from a 
multicenter randomized controlled trial. JMIR 
Diabetes 2024;9:e55165 
476. Li Y, Buys N, Ferguson S, et al.The evaluation 
of cognitive-behavioral therapy-based interven-
tion on type 2 diabetes patients with comorbid 
metabolic syndrome: a randomized controlled 
trial. Diabetol Metab Syndr 2023;15:158 
477. Fisher V, Li WW, Malabu U.The effectiveness 
of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) on 
the mental health, HbA1C, and mindfulness of 
diabetes patients: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. Appl 
Psychol Health Well Being 2023;15:1733–1749 
478. Ajele KW, Deacon E. Targeting depression 
and diabetes comorbidity: a generalization meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials on 
cognitive-behavioural therapy efﬁcacy. Prim Care 
Diabetes 2025;19:93–102 
479. Varela-Moreno E, Carreira Soler M, Guzmán-
Parra J, Jódar-Sánchez F, Mayoral-Cleries F, Anarte-
Ortíz MT. Effectiveness of eHealth-based psycho-
logical interventions for depression treatment in 
patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus: a 
systematic review. Front Psychol 2021;12:746217 
480. Tavares Franquez R, Del Grossi Moura M, 
Cristina Ferreira McClung D, et al. E-Health 
technologies for treatment of depression, anxiety 
and emotional distress in person with diabetes 
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;203:110854 
481. Koning E, Grigolon RB, Breda V, et al. The 
effect of lifestyle interventions on depressive 
symptom severity in individuals with type-2 
diabetes: a meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials.J Psychosom Res 2023;173:111445 
482. Seddigh S, Bagheri S, Shariﬁ N, Moravej H, 
Hadian Shirazi Z. The effect of yoga therapy 
directed by virtual training on depression of 
adolescent girls with type 1 diabetes: a rando-
mized controlled trial. J Diabetes Metab Disord 
2023;22:1273–1281 
483. Saha CK, Shubrook JH, Guyton Hornsby W, et 
al. Program ACTIVE II: 6- and 12-month outcomes 
of a treatment approach for major depressive 
disorder in adults with type 2 diabetes. J Diabetes 
Complications 2024;38:108666 
484. Chen X, Zhao P, Wang W, Guo L, Pan Q. The 
antidepressant effects of GLP-1 receptor agonists: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J 
Geriatr Psychiatry 2024;32:117–127 
485. Pierret ACS, Mizuno Y, Saunders P, et al. 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists and 
mental health: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA Psychiatry 2025;82:643–653 
486. Pinhas-Hamiel O, Hamiel U, Levy-Shraga Y. 
Eating disorders in adolescents with type 1 
diabetes: challenges in diagnosis and treatment. 
World J Diabetes 2015;6:517–526 
487. Niemelä PE, Leppänen HA, Voutilainen A, et 
al. Prevalence of eating disorder symptoms in 
people with insulin-dependent-diabetes: a syste-
matic review and meta-analysis. Eat Behav 2024; 
53:101863 
488. Dziewa M, Ban ka B , Herbet M, Pia˛tk owska-
Chmiel I. Eating disorders and diabetes: facing the 
dual challenge. Nutrients 2023;15:3955 
489. Dean YE, Motawea KR, Aslam M, et al. 
Association between type 1 diabetes mellitus and 
eating disorders: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab 2024;7:e473 
490. Beam AB, Wiebe DJ. Subtypes of insulin 
restriction in diabetes management: a systematic 
review. Curr Diab Rep2025;25:20 
491. Garrido-Bueno 
M, 
Núñez-Sánchez 
M, 
García-Lozano MS, Fagundo-Rivera J, Romero-
Alvero A, Fernández-León P. Effects of body image 
and self-concept on the management of type 1 
diabetes mellitus in adolescents and young adults: 
a systematic review. Healthcare (Basel) 2025;13: 
1425 
492. Abbott S, Dindol N, Tahrani AA, Piya MK. 
Binge eating disorder and night eating syndrome 
in adults with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review. 
J Eat Disord2018;6:36 
493. Weinger K, Beverly EA. Barriers to achieving 
glycemic targets: who omits insulin and why? 
Diabetes Care 2010;33:450–452 
494. Priesterroth L-S, Grammes J, Kubiak T. 
Subtypes of disordered eating and their diabetes-
related and psychosocial concomitants in adults 
with type 1 diabetes. J Diabetes Complications 
2025;39:109067 
495. Araia E, King RM, Pouwer F, Speight J, 
Hendrieckx C. Psychological correlates of dis-
ordered eating in youth with type 1 diabetes: 
results from diabetes MILES Youth-Australia. 
Pediatr Diabetes 2020;21:664–672 
496. Pekin C, McHale M, Seymour M, et al. 
Psychopathology and eating behaviour in people 
with type 2 diabetes referred for bariatric surgery. 
Eat Weight Disord 2022;27:3627–3635 
497. Freitag AC, Koller OG, Menezes VM, Luft VC, 
de Almeida JC. Emotional and uncontrolled eating 
behaviors are associated with poorer glycemic 
control in patients with type 2 diabetes. Nutr Res 
2025;140:93–101 
498. Garcia-Poblet M, Sospedra I, Martinez-Sanz 
JM.The association betweenpsychological distress 
and disordered eating behavior in young people 
with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review. Nutr 
Rev. 16 June 2025 [Epub ahead of print]. DOI: 10
.1093/nutrit/nuaf072 
 
499. Mateo K, Greenberg B, Valenzuela J. 
Disordered eating behaviors and eating disorders 
in youth with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review. 
Diabetes Spectr 2024;37:342–348 
500. Julceus EF, Liese AD, Alfalki AM, et al. The 
association of levels of food insecurity and 
disordered eating behaviors among youth and 
young adults with diabetes: the SEARCH for 
Diabetes in Youth Study. Int J Eat Disord 2025;58: 
1039–1047 
501. Markowitz JT, Butler DA, Volkening LK, 
Antisdel JE, Anderson BJ, Laffel LMB. Brief 
screening tool for disordered eating in diabetes: 
internal consistency and external validity in a 
contemporary sample of pediatric patients with 
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2010;33:495–500 
502. Zuijdwijk CS, Pardy SA, Dowden JJ, Dominic 
AM, Bridger T, Newhook LA. The mSCOFF for 
screening disordered eating in pediatric type 1 
diabetes. DiabetesCare 2014;37:e26-27–e27 
503. Yanovski SZ, Marcus MD,Wadden TA,Walsh 
BT. The Questionnaire on Eating and Weight 
Patterns-5: an updated screening instrument for 
binge eating disorder. Int J Eat Disord 2015;48: 
259–261 
504. Gormally J, Black S, Daston S, Rardin D. Binge 
Eating Scale [PsychTESTS dataset]. APA PsycTests. 
Accessed 8 September 2025. Available from 
https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10
.1037%2Ft08303-000 
 
505. Allison KC, Stunkard AJ. (2006). Night Eating 
Questionnaire. (NEQ) [Database record]. APA 
PsycTests. Accessed 8 September 2025. Available 
from https://psycnet.apa.org/doiLanding?doi=10
.1037%2Ft62905-000 
 
506. Zaremba N, Watson A, Kan C, et al. 
Multidisciplinary healthcare teams’ challenges and 
strategies in supporting people with type 1 
diabetes to recover from disordered eating. Diabet 
Med2020;37:1992–2000 
507. Peterson CM, Fischer S, Young-Hyman D. 
Topical review: a comprehensive risk model for 
disordered eating in youth with type 1 diabetes. J 
Pediatr Psychol 2015;40:385–390 
508. Banting R, Randle-Phillips C. A systematic 
review of psychological interventions for comorbid 
type 1 diabetes mellitus and eating disorders. 
Diabetes Management 2018;8:1–18 
509. Priesterroth L, Grammes J, Clauter M, Kubiak 
T. Diabetes technologies in people with type 1 
diabetes mellitus and disordered eating: a sys-
tematic review on continuous subcutaneous 
insulin infusion, continuous glucose monitoring 
and automated insulin delivery. Diabet Med 2021; 
38:e14581 
510. Hennekes MHCL, Haugvik S, de Wit M, et al. 
Diabetes Body Project: acute effects of an eating 
disorder prevention program for young women 
with type 1 diabetes. A multinational randomized 
controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2025;48:220–225 
511. Jones CJ, Read R, O’Donnell N, et al. 
PRIORITY Trial: results from a feasibility rando-
mised controlled trial of a psychoeducational 
intervention for parents to prevent disordered 
eating in children and young people with type 1 
diabetes. Diabet Med 2024;41:e15263 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S129 
512. Stadler M, Zaremba N, Harrison A, et al. 
Safety of a co-designed cognitive behavioural 
therapy intervention for people with type 1 
diabetes and eating disorders (STEADY): a feasi­
bility randomised controlled trial. Lancet Reg 
Health Eur 2025;50:101205 
513. Traviss-Turner G, Bowes E, Hill A, et al. 
Providing online guided self-help for the manage­
ment of binge eating in adults with type 2 diabetes: 
the POSE-D pilot study and process evaluation. 
Br J Nutr 2024;132:1542–1552 
514.  van Bloemendaal  L,  IJzerman RG,  Ten Kulve  
JS, et al. GLP-1 receptor activation modulates 
appetite-and reward-related brain areas in humans. 
Diabetes2014;63:4186–4196 
515. Aoun L, Almardini S, Saliba F, et al. GLP-1 
receptor agonists: a novel pharmacotherapy for 
binge eating (binge eating disorder and bulimia 
nervosa)? A systematic review. J Clin Transl 
Endocrinol 2024;35:100333 
516. Jackson CA, Fleetwood K, Kerssens J, Smith 
DJ,  Mercer S,Wild SH.  Incidence of type 2  diabetes  
in people with a history of hospitalization for major 
mental illness in Scotland, 2001-2015: a retro­
spective cohort study. Diabetes Care 2019;42: 
1879–1885 
517. Fleetwood KJ, Wild SH, Licence KAM, et al.; 
Scottish Diabetes Research Network Epidemiology 
Group. Severe mental illness and type 2 diabetes 
outcomes and complications: a nationwide cohort 
study. Diabetes Care 2023;46:1363–1371 
518. Pillinger T, McCutcheon RA, Vano L, et al. 
Comparative effects of 18 antipsychotics on 
metabolic function in patients with schizophrenia, 
predictors of metabolic dysregulation, and asso­
ciation with psychopathology: a systematic review 
and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 
2020;7:64–77 
519. Zhang Y, Liu Y, Su Y, et al. The metabolic side 
effects of 12 antipsychotic drugs used for the 
treatment of schizophrenia on glucose: a network 
meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry 2017;17:373 
520. American Diabetes Association; American 
Psychiatric Association; American Association of 
Clinical Endocrinologists; North American Asso­
ciation for the Study of Obesity. Consensus 
development conference on antipsychotic drugs 
and obesity and diabetes. Diabetes Care 2004;27: 
596–601 
521. Mulligan K, McBain H, Lamontagne-
Godwin F, et al. Barriers to effective diabetes 
management—a survey of people with severe 
mental illness. BMC Psychiatry 2018;18:165 
522. NadalIP,ClifftonC,TolaniE,etal.Elicitingthe 
mechanisms of action of care navigators in the 
management of type 2 diabetes in people with 
severe mental illness: a qualitative study. Diabet 
Med 2022;39:e14894 
523. Ojo O, Kalocsányiová E, McCrone P, Elliott H, 
Milligan W, Gkaintatzi E. Non-pharmacological 
interventions for type 2 diabetes in people living 
with severe mental illness: results of a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 2024;21:423 
524. Schnitzer K, Cather C, Zvonar V, et al. Patient 
experience and predictors of improvement in a 
group behavioral and educational intervention for 
individuals with diabetes and serious mental 
illness: mixed methods case study. J Particip Med 
2021;13:e21934 
525. Biessels GJ, Whitmer RA. Cognitive dys­
function in diabetes: how to implement emerging 
guidelines. Diabetologia 2020;63:3–9 
526. Brands AMA, Biessels GJ, de Haan EHF, 
Kappelle LJ, Kessels RPC. The effects of type 1 
diabetes on cognitive performance: a meta-
analysis.Diabetes Care 2005;28:726–735 
527. Carmichael OT, Neiberg RH, Dutton GR, et al. 
Long-term change in physiological markers and 
cognitive performance in type 2 diabetes: the Look 
AHEAD study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020;105: 
e4778–e4791 
528. Jin C-Y, Yu S-W, Yin J-T, Yuan X-Y, Wang X-G. 
Corresponding risk factors between cognitive 
impairment and type 1 diabetes mellitus: a 
narrative review. Heliyon 2022;8:e10073 
529. Mao S, Wang Y. Risk factors for cognitive 
decline in type 2 diabetes mellitus adults: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Mol Cell 
Biochem2025:10.1007/s11010 
530. Chi H, Song M, Zhang J, Zhou J, Liu D. 
Relationship between acute glucose variability and 
cognitive decline in type 2 diabetes: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2023;18: 
e0289782 
531. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Cleary PA, et al.; 
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/EDIC 
Research Group. Biomedical risk factors for 
decreased cognitive functioning in type 1 diabetes: 
an 18 year follow-up of the Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial (DCCT) cohort. Diabetologia 
2011;54:245–255 
532. Biessels GJ, Despa F. Cognitive decline and 
dementia in diabetes mellitus: mechanisms and 
clinical implications. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2018;14: 
591–604 
533. Munshi MN. Cognitive dysfunction in older 
adults with diabetes: what a clinician needs to 
know.Diabetes Care 2017;40:461–467 
534. Garcia-Argibay M, Li L, Du Rietz E, et al. 
The association between type 2 diabetes and 
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: a syste­
matic review, meta-analysis, and population-
based sibling study. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2023; 
147:105076 
535. Ding K, Reynolds CM, Driscoll KA, Janicke 
DM. The relationship between executive function­
ing, type 1 diabetes self-management behaviors, 
and glycemic control in adolescents and young 
adults. Curr Diab Rep 2021;21:10 
536.  Miller  AL, Albright  D, Bauer  KW, et  al.  Self-
regulation as a protective factor for diabetes 
distress and adherence in youth with type 1 
diabetes during the COVID-19 pandemic. J Pediatr 
Psychol 2022;47:873–882 
537. Feinkohl I, Aung PP, Keller M, et al.; 
Edinburgh Type 2 Diabetes Study (ET2DS) 
Investigators. Severe hypoglycemia and cognitive 
decline in older people with type 2 diabetes: the 
Edinburgh type 2 diabetes study. Diabetes Care 
2014;37:507–515 
538. Strudwick SK, Carne C, Gardiner J, Foster JK, 
Davis EA, Jones TW. Cognitive functioning in 
children with early onset type 1 diabetes and 
severe hypoglycemia. JPediatr 2005;147:680–685 
539. Mauras N, Buckingham B, White NH, et al.; 
Diabetes Research in Children Network (DirecNet). 
Impact of type 1 diabetes in the developing brain 
in children: a longitudinal study. Diabetes Care 
2021;44:983–992 
540. West RK, Ravona-Springer R, Schmeidler J, et 
al. The association of duration of type 2 diabetes 
with cognitive performance is modulated by long­
term glycemic control. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 
2014;22:1055–1059 
541. Seminer A, Mulihano A, O’Brien C, et al. 
Cardioprotective glucose-lowering agents and 
dementia risk: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA Neurol 2025;82:450–460 
542. Cai Y-H, Wang Z, Feng L-Y, Ni G-X. Effect of 
exercise on the cognitive function of older patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Front Hum Neurosci 2022; 
16:876935 
543. Anothaisintawee T, Reutrakul S, Van Cauter 
E, Thakkinstian A. Sleep disturbances compared 
to traditional risk factors for diabetes develop­
ment: systematic review and meta-analysis. Sleep 
Med Rev 2016;30:11–24 
544. Liu H, Zhu H, Lu Q, et al. Sleep features and 
the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Ann Med 2025;57: 
2447422 
545. Zhang X, Zhang R, Cheng L, et al. The effect 
of sleep impairment on gestational diabetes 
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
cohort studies. Sleep Med 2020;74:267–277 
546. Monzon AD, Patton SR, Koren D. Childhood 
diabetes and sleep. Pediatr Pulmonol 2022;57: 
1835–1850 
547. Lee SWH, Ng KY, Chin WK. The impact of 
sleep amount and sleep quality on glycemic 
control in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Sleep Med Rev 2017;31 
:91–101 
548. Al-Gadi IS, Streisand R, Tully C, et al. Up all 
night? Sleep disruption in parents of young 
children newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes. 
Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:815–819 
549. Macaulay GC, Boucher SE, Yogarajah A, 
Galland BC, Wheeler BJ. Sleep and night-time 
caregiving in parents of children and adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes mellitus—a qualitative study. 
Behav Sleep Med 2020;18:622–636 
550. Reutrakul S,Thakkinstian A, Anothaisintawee 
T, et al. Sleep characteristics in type 1 diabetes 
and associations with glycemic control: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med 2016;23: 
26–45 
551. Khalil M, Power N, Graham E, Deschênes SS, 
Schmitz N. The association between sleep and 
diabetes outcomes —a systematic review. Diabetes 
ResClinPract2020;161:108035 
552. Denic-Roberts H, Costacou T, Orchard TJ. 
Subjective sleep disturbances and glycemic control 
in adults with long-standing type 1 diabetes: the 
Pittsburgh’s Epidemiology of Diabetes Complica­
tions study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2016;119:1–12 
553. Fallahi A, Jamil DI, Karimi EB, Baghi V, 
Gheshlagh RG. Prevalence of obstructive sleep 
apnea in patients with type 2 diabetes: a sys­
tematic review and meta-analysis.Diabetes Metab 
Syndr 2019;13:2463–2468 
554. Schipper SBJ, Van Veen MM, Elders PJM, 
et al. Sleep disorders in people with type 2 diabetes 
and associated health outcomes: a review of the 
literature.Diabetologia 2021;64:2367–2377 
555. Bener A, Al-Hamaq AOAA, Agan AF, Öztürk 
M, Ömer A. The prevalence of restless legs 
syndrome and comorbid condition among patient 
with type 2 diabetic mellitus visiting primary 
healthcare. J Family Med Prim Care 2019;8:3814– 
3820 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S130 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
556. Modarresnia L, Golgiri F, Madani NH, Emami 
Z, Tanha K. Restless legs syndrome in Iranian 
people with type 2 diabetes mellitus: the role in 
quality of life and quality of sleep. J Clin Sleep Med 
2018;14:223–228 
557. Manodpitipong A, Saetung S, Nimitphong H, 
et al. Night-shift work is associated with poorer 
glycaemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes. 
J SleepRes2017;26:764–772 
558. El Tayeb I, El Saghier E, Ramadan B. Impact of 
shift work on glycemic control in insulin treated 
diabetics Dar El Chefa Hospital, Egypt 2014. Int J 
Diabetes Res 2014;3:15–21 
559. Itani O, Kaneita Y,Tokiya M, et al. Short sleep 
duration, shift work, and actual days taken off 
work are predictive life-style risk factors for new-
onset metabolic syndrome: a seven-year cohort 
study of 40,000 male workers. Sleep Med 2017;39: 
87–94 
560. Lecube A, Simó R, Pallayova M, et al. 
Pulmonary function and sleep breathing: two new 
targets for type 2 diabetes care. Endocr Rev 2017; 
38:550–573 
561. Herth J, Sievi NA, Schmidt F, Kohler M. 
Effects of continuous positive airway pressure 
therapy on glucose metabolism in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnoea and type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Respir 
Rev2023;32:230083 
562. Yang R, Zhang L, Guo J, et al. Glucagon-like 
peptide-1 receptor agonists for obstructive sleep 
apnea in patients with obesity and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Transl Med 2025;23:389 
563. Malhotra A, Grunstein RR, Fietze I, et al.; 
SURMOUNT-OSA Investigators. Tirzepatide for the 
treatment of obstructive sleep apnea and obesity. 
N Engl J Med2024;391:1193–1205 
564. Tan X, van Egmond L, Chapman CD, 
Cedernaes J, Benedict C. Aiding sleep in type 2 
diabetes: therapeutic considerations. Lancet Dia­
betesEndocrinol 2018;6:60–68 
565. Carreon SA, Cao VT, Anderson BJ,Thompson 
DI, Marrero DG, Hilliard ME. ‘I don’t sleep through 
the night’: qualitative study of sleep in type 1 
diabetes. Diabet Med 2022;39:e14763 
566. Hood KK, Schneider-Utaka AK, Reed ZW, et 
al.; PEDAP Trial Study Group. Patient reported 
outcomes (PROs) and user experiences of young 
children with type 1 diabetes using t:slim X2 insulin 
pump with control-IQ technology. Diabetes Res 
Clin Pract 2024;208:111114 
567. Cobry EC, Hamburger E, Jaser SS. Impact of 
the hybrid closed-loop system on sleep and quality 
of life in youth with type 1 diabetes and their 
parents. DiabetesTechnol Ther 2020;22:794–800 
568. Franceschi R, Mozzillo E, Di Candia F, et al. A 
systematic review on the impact of commercially 
available hybrid closed loop systems on psy­
chological outcomes in youthswith type 1 diabetes 
and their parents. Diabet Med 2023;40:e15099 
569. Kothari V, Cardona Z, Chirakalwasan N, 
Anothaisintawee T, Reutrakul S. Sleep inter­
ventions and glucose metabolism: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med 2021;78: 
24–35 
570. Groeneveld L, Beulens JW, Blom MT, et al. 
The effect of cognitive behavioral therapy for 
insomnia on sleep and glycemic outcomes in 
people with type 2 diabetes: a randomized 
controlled trial. Sleep Med 2024;120:44–52 
571. Kärppä M, Yardley J, Pinner K, et al. Long­
term efﬁcacy and tolerability of lemborexant 
compared with placebo in adults with insomnia 
disorder: results from the phase 3 randomized 
clinical trial SUNRISE 2. Sleep 2020;43:zsaa123 
572. Tsunoda T, Yamada M, Akiyama T, et al. The 
effects of ramelteon on glucose metabolism and 
sleep quality in type 2 diabetic patients with 
insomnia: a pilot prospective randomized con­
trolledtrial. JClin MedRes2016;8:878–887 
573. Toi N, Inaba M, Kurajoh M, et al. 
Improvement of glycemic control by treatment for 
insomnia with suvorexant in type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. J Clin Transl Endocrinol 2019;15:37–44 
574. Li M, Li D, Tang Y, et al. Effect of diabetes 
sleep education for T2DM who sleep after 
midnight: a pilot study from China. Metab Syndr 
Relat Disord 2018;16:13–19 
575. Khandelwal D, Dutta D, Chittawar S, Kalra S. 
Sleep disorders in type 2 diabetes. Indian J 
Endocrinol Metab 2017;21:758–761 
576. Hernar I, Cooper JG, Nilsen RM, et al. 
Diabetes distress and associations with demo­
graphic and clinical variables: a nationwide 
population-based registry study of 10,186 adults 
with type 1 diabetes in Norway. Diabetes Care 
2024;47:126–131 
577. McCarthy MM, Whittemore R, Gholson G, 
Grey M. Diabetes distress, depressive symptoms, 
and cardiovascular health in adults with type 1 
diabetes.Nurs Res 2019;68:445–452 
578. Lloyd CE, Pambianco G, Orchard TJ. Does 
diabetes-related distress explain the presence 
of depressive symptoms and/or poor self-care in 
individuals with type 1 diabetes? Diabet Med 
2010;27:234–237 
579. Chatwin H, Broadley M, Hendrieckx C, et al.; 
Hypo-RESOLVE Consortium. The impact of hypo­
glycaemia on quality of life among adults with 
type 1 diabetes: results from “YourSAY: hypo­
glycaemia.” J Diabetes Complications 2023;37: 
108232 
580. Trief PM, Xing D, Foster NC, et al.; T1D 
Exchange Clinic Network. Depression in adults in 
the T1D Exchange Clinic Registry. Diabetes Care 
2014;37:1563–1572 
581. Schram MT, Baan CA, Pouwer F. Depression 
and quality of life in patients with diabetes: a 
systematic review from the European Depression 
in Diabetes (EDID) research consortium. Curr 
Diabetes Rev 2009;5:112–119 
582. Schmitt A, McSharry J, Speight J, et al. 
Symptoms of depression and anxiety in adults 
with type 1 diabetes: associations with self-care 
behaviour, glycaemia and incident complications 
over four years—results from diabetes MILES-
Australia. J Affect Disord 2021;282:803–811 
583. Stahl-Pehe A, Selinski S, Bächle C, et al. 
Screening for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) 
and associated factors in adolescents and young 
adults with type 1 diabetes: cross-sectional 
results of a Germany-wide population-based 
study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2022;184:109197 
584. Goebel-Fabbri AE, Fikkan J, Franko DL, 
Pearson K, Anderson BJ, Weinger K. Insulin 
restriction and associated morbidity and mortality 
in women with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 
2008;31:415–419 
585. Galler A, Bollow E, Meusers M, et al.; 
German Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research (BMBF) Competence Network Diabetes 
Mellitus. Comparison of glycemic and metabolic 
control in youth with type 1 diabetes with and 
without antipsychotic medication: analysis from 
the nationwide German/Austrian Diabetes 
Survey (DPV).DiabetesCare 2015;38:1051–1057 
586. Cooper MN, Lin A, Alvares GA, de Klerk NH, 
Jones TW, Davis EA. Psychiatric disorders during 
early adulthood in those with childhood onset 
type 1 diabetes: rates and clinical risk factors 
from population-based follow-up. Pediatr Diabetes 
2017;18:599–606 
587. Chan JKN, Wong CSM, Or PCF, Chen EYH, 
Chang WC. Risk of mortality and complications in 
patients with schizophrenia and diabetes mellitus: 
population-based cohort study. Br J Psychiatry 
2021;219:375–382 
588. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Braffett BH, et al.; 
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Cognitive performance 
declines in older adults with type 1 diabetes: 
results from 32 years of follow-up in the DCCT and 
EDIC Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9: 
436–445 
589. Ryan CM, Geckle MO, Orchard TJ. Cognitive 
efﬁciency declines over time in adults with type 1 
diabetes: effects of micro- and macrovascular 
complications. Diabetologia 2003;46:940–948 
590. Chaytor NS, Riddlesworth TD, Bzdick S, et al.; 
T1D Exchange Severe Hypoglycemia in Older 
Adults with Type 1 Diabetes Study Group. The 
relationship between neuropsychological assess­
ment, numeracy, and functional status in older 
adults with type 1 diabetes. Neuropsychol Rehabil 
2017;27:507–521 
591. Chow YY, Verdonschot M, McEvoy CT, 
Peeters G. Associations between depression and 
cognition, mild cognitive impairment and demen­
tia in persons with diabetes mellitus: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 
2022;185:109227 
592. Matsunaga M, Tanihara S, He Y, Yatsuya H, 
Ota A. Impact of diabetes on mortality and 
hospitalization after dementia diagnosis: health 
insurance claims data analysis. Geriatr Gerontol Int 
2024;24:773–781 
593. Fisher L, Mullan JT, Arean P, Glasgow RE, 
Hessler D, Masharani U. Diabetes distress but not 
clinical depression or depressive symptoms is 
associated with glycemic control in both cross-
sectional and longitudinal analyses. Diabetes Care 
2010;33:23–28 
594. Khashayar 
P, 
Shirzad 
N, 
Zarbini 
A, 
Esteghamati A, Hemmatabadi M, Sharaﬁ E. 
Diabetes-related distress and its association with 
the complications of diabetes in Iran. J Diabetes 
Metab Disord 2022;21:1569–1575 
595. Park H-S, Cho Y, Seo DH, et al. Impact of 
diabetes distress on glycemic control and diabetic 
complications in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Sci Rep 
2024;14:5568 
596. Hayashino Y, Okamura S,Tsujii S, Ishii H; Care 
Registry at Tenri Study Group. Diabetes distress is 
associated with future risk of progression of 
diabetic nephropathy in adults with type 2 
diabetes: a prospective cohort study (Diabetes 
Distress and Care Registry at Tenri [DDCRT23]). 
Can J Diabetes 2023;47:519–524 
597. Young CF, Mullin R, Moverley JA, Shubrook 
JH. Associations between diabetes-related distress 
and predicted cardiovascular complication risks 
in patients with type 2 diabetes. J Osteopath Med 
2022;122:319–326 
598. Bruno BA, Choi D, Thorpe KE, Yu CH. 
Relationship among diabetes distress, decisional 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diabetesjournals.org/care 
Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being 
S131 
conﬂict, quality of life, and patient perception 
of chronic illness care in a cohort of patients with 
type 2 diabetes and other comorbidities. Diabetes 
Care 2019;42:1170–1177 
599. Hayashino Y, Okamura S, Tsujii S, Ishii H; 
Care Registry at Tenri Study Group. Association 
between diabetes distress and all-cause mortality 
in Japanese individuals with type 2 diabetes: a 
prospective cohort study (Diabetes Distress and 
Care Registry in Tenri [DDCRT 18]). Diabetologia 
2018;61:1978–1984 
600. Lustman PJ, Anderson RJ, Freedland KE, de 
Groot M, Carney RM, Clouse RE. Depression and 
poor glycemic control: a meta-analytic review of 
the literature. Diabetes Care 2000;23:934–942 
601. Khuwaja AK, Lalani S, Dhanani R, Azam IS, 
Raﬁque G,White F. Anxiety and depression among 
outpatients with type 2 diabetes: a multi-centre 
study of prevalence and associated factors. 
Diabetol Metab Syndr 2010;2:72 
602. Chourpiliadis C, Zeng Y, Lovik A, et al. 
Metabolic proﬁle and long-term risk of depression, 
anxiety, and stress-related disorders. JAMA Netw 
Open 2024;7:e244525 
603. Lin EHB, Rutter CM, Katon W, et al. 
Depression and advanced complications of 
diabetes: a prospective cohort study. Diabetes 
Care 2010;33:264–269 
604. Gonzalez JS, Peyrot M, McCarl LA, et al. 
Depression and diabetes treatment nonad­
herence: a meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 2008; 
31:2398–2403 
605. Fisher L, Glasgow RE, Strycker LA. The 
relationship between diabetes distress and clinical 
depression with glycemic control among patients 
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2010;33: 
1034–1036 
606. Ali S, Stone M, Skinner TC, Robertson N, 
Davies M, Khunti K. The association between 
depression and health-related quality of life in 
people with type 2 diabetes: a systematic 
literature review. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2010; 
26:75–89 
607. Park M, Katon WJ, Wolf FM. Depression and 
risk of mortality in individuals with diabetes: a 
meta-analysis and systematic review. Gen Hosp 
Psychiatry 2013;35:217–225 
608. Lee LO, Grimm KJ, Spiro A, 3rd, Kubzansky 
LD. Neuroticism, worry, and cardiometabolic risk 
trajectories: ﬁndings from a 40-year study of men. 
J Am Heart Assoc 2022;11:e022006 
609. Deschênes SS, Burns RJ, Schmitz N. 
Trajectories of anxiety symptoms and associations 
with incident cardiovascular disease in adults with 
type 2 diabetes. J Psychosom Res 2018;104: 
95–100 
610. Karpha K, Biswas J, Nath S, Dhali A, Sarkhel S, 
Dhali GK. Factors affecting depression and anxiety 
in diabetic patients: a cross sectional study from 
a tertiary care hospital in Eastern India. Ann Med 
Surg (Lond) 2022;84:104945 
611. Deschênes SS, Burns RJ, Schmitz N. Asso­
ciations between diabetes, major depressive 
disorder and generalized anxiety disorder com­
orbidity, and disability: ﬁndings from the 2012 
Canadian Community Health Survey—Mental 
Health (CCHS-MH). J Psychosom Res 2015; 
78:137–142 
612. Papelbaum M, de Oliveira Moreira R, 
Coutinho WF, et al. Does binge-eating matter for 
glycemic control in type 2 diabetes patients? J Eat 
Disord2019;7:30 
613. TODAY Study Group. Longitudinal associa­
tion of depressive symptoms, binge eating, and 
quality of life with cardiovascular risk factors in 
young adults with youth-onset type 2 diabetes: 
the TODAY2 study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:1073– 
1081 
614. Meneghini LF, Spadola J, Florez H. Pre­
valence and associations of binge eating disorder 
in a multiethnic population with type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2006;29:2760 
615.  Trott M, Driscoll  R, Iraldo  E, Pardhan  S.  
Pathological eating behaviours and risk of retino­
pathy in diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Diabetes Metab Disord 2022;21:1047– 
1054 
616. Wykes TL, Lee AA, McKibbin CL, Laurent SM. 
Self-efﬁcacy and hemoglobin A1C among adults 
with serious mental illness and type 2 diabetes: the 
roles of cognitive functioning and psychiatric 
symptom severity. Psychosom Med 2016;78: 
263–270 
617. Dixon LB, Kreyenbuhl JA, Dickerson FB, et al. 
A comparison of type 2 diabetes outcomes among 
persons with and without severe mental illnesses. 
Psychiatr Serv2004;55:892–900 
618. McEvoy JP, Meyer JM, Goff DC, et al. 
Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in patients 
with schizophrenia: baseline results from the 
Clinical Antipsychotic Trials of Intervention Effec­
tiveness (CATIE) schizophrenia trial and compari­
son with national estimates from NHANES III. 
Schizophr Res2005;80:19–32 
619. Kim H, Lee K-N, Shin DW, Han K, Jeon HJ. 
Association of comorbid mental disorders with 
cardiovascular disease risk in patients with type 2 
diabetes: a nationwide cohort study. Gen Hosp 
Psychiatry2022;79:33–41 
620. Scheuer SH, Kosjerina V, Lindekilde N, et al. 
Severe mental illness and the risk of diabetes 
complications: a nationwide, register-based cohort 
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:e3504– 
e3514 
621. Tzeng W-C,Tai Y-M, Feng H-P, Lin C-H, Chang 
Y-C. Diabetes self-care behaviours among people 
diagnosed with serious mental illness: a cross-
sectional correlational study. J Psychiatr Ment 
Health Nurs 2024;31:364–375 
622.  Bajor LA,  Gunzler D,  Einstadter D,  et  al.  
Associations between comorbid anxiety, diabetes 
control, and overall medical burden in patients 
with serious mental illness and diabetes. Int J 
Psychiatry Med 2015;49:309–320 
623.  Dickerson  F, Brown  CH, Fang  L, et  al.  Quality  
of life in individuals with serious mental illness 
and type 2 diabetes. Psychosomatics 2008;49: 
109–114 
624. Ter Braake JG, Fleetwood KJ, Vos RC, et al.; 
Scottish Diabetes Research Network Epidemiology 
Group. Cardiovascular risk management among 
individuals with type 2 diabetes and severe mental 
illness: a cohort study. Diabetologia 2024;67: 
1029–1039 
625. Munshi M, Grande L, Hayes M, et al. 
Cognitive dysfunction is associated with poor 
diabetes control in older adults. Diabetes Care 
2006;29:1794–1799 
626. Lee S-H, Han K, Cho H, et al. Variability in 
metabolic parameters and risk of dementia: a 
nationwide population-based study. Alzheimers 
Res Ther 2018;10:110 
627. Olesen KKW, Thrane PG, Gyldenkerne C, et 
al. Diabetes and coronary artery disease as risk 
factors for dementia. Eur J Prev Cardiol 2024;32: 
477–484 
628.  Cheng D,  Zhao  X,  Yang S,  Wang  G, Ning G.  
Association between diabetic retinopathy and 
cognitive impairment: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Front Aging Neurosci 2021;13: 
692911 
629. Sinclair AJ, Girling AJ, Bayer AJ. Cognitive 
dysfunction in older subjects with diabetes 
mellitus:impactondiabetes self-managementand 
useofcareservices.All Wales Research into Elderly 
(AWARE) Study. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2000; 
50:203–212 
630. Katon W, Lyles CR, Parker MM, Karter AJ, 
Huang ES, Whitmer RA. Association of depression 
with increased risk of dementia in patients with 
type 2 diabetes: the Diabetes and Aging Study. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2012;69:410–417 
631. Janssen J, Koekkoek PS, Biessels G-J, 
Kappelle JL, Rutten GEHM; Cog-ID study group. 
Depressive symptoms and quality of life after 
screening for cognitive impairment in patients 
with type 2 diabetes: observations from the 
Cog-ID cohort study. BMJ Open 2019;9:e024696 
632. Titcomb TJ, Richey P, Casanova R, et al. 
Association of type 2 diabetes mellitus with 
dementia-related and non-dementia-related 
mortality among postmenopausal women: a 
secondary competing risks analysis of the 
women’s health initiative. Alzheimers Dement 
2024;20:234–242 
633. Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al. 
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 
2022. A consensus report by the American 
Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European 
Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). 
Diabetes Care 2022;45:2753–2786 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S89/848861/dc26s005.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
