6. GLYCEMIC GOALS, HYPOGLYCEMIA, AND HYPERGLYCEMIC CRISES
6. Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, 
and Hyperglycemic Crises: Standards 
of Care in Diabetes—2026
Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S132–S149 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S006
American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for 
Diabetes*
*A complete list of members of the American 
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee 
for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/ 
10.2337/dc26-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each contributor 
is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 6. 
Glycemic goals, hypoglycemia, and hyperglycemic 
crises: Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026. 
Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S132–S149
© 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. 
Readers may use this work for educational, 
noncommercial purposes if properly cited and 
unaltered. The version of record may be linked 
at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA 
permission is required to post this work on any 
third-party site or platform. This publication and its 
contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or 
used for text or data mining, machine learning, 
or similar technologies without prior written 
permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute 
this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes 
.org. More information is available at https:// 
diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” in­
cludes the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to 
provide the components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guide­
lines, and tools to evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional 
Practice Committee for Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are re­
sponsible for updating the Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as war­
ranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as 
well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations 
and a full list of Professional Practice Committee members, please refer to 
Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards 
of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
ASSESSMENT OF GLYCEMIC STATUS
Glycemic status is assessed by A1C measurement, blood glucose monitoring (BGM) by 
capillary (finger-stick) devices, and different continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) met­
rics such as time in range (TIR), time below range (TBR), time above range (TAR), glu­
cose management indicator (GMI), coefficient of variation, and mean glucose. Clinical 
trials of interventions that lower A1C have demonstrated the benefits of improved gly­
cemia with respect to long-term diabetes complications. Glucose monitoring via CGM 
or BGM (discussed in detail in section 7, “Diabetes Technology”) is useful for diabetes 
self-management, can provide nuanced information on glucose responses to meals, 
physical activity, and medication changes, and is particularly useful for optimal medica­
tion management and safety in individuals taking insulin. CGM serves an increasingly 
important role in optimizing the effectiveness and safety of treatment in many people 
with type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, diabetes in pregnancy, and other forms of diabe­
tes (e.g., cystic fibrosis–related diabetes). Individuals on a variety of insulin treatment 
plans benefit from CGM with improved glucose levels, decreased hypoglycemia, and 
enhanced self-efficacy (section 7, “Diabetes Technology”) (1).
Glycemic Assessment
Recommendations
6.1 Assess glycemic status by A1C A and/or continuous glucose monitoring 
(CGM) metrics such as time in range, time above range, and time below range. 
B Fructosamine or CGM can be used for glycemic monitoring when an alterna­
tive to A1C is required. B
6.2 Assess glycemic status at least two times a year, and more frequently (e.g., 
every 3 months) for individuals not meeting glycemic goals or with recent treat­
ment changes, frequent or severe hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia, or changes in 
health status, or during periods of rapid growth and development in children 
and adolescents. E
S132
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Glycemic Assessment by A1C
The A1C test is the primary tool for assess­
ing glycemic status in both clinical practice 
and clinical trials, and it is strongly linked 
to diabetes complications (2–4). A1C re­
flects average glycemia over approxi­
mately 2–3 months. The performance of 
laboratory tests for A1C is generally excellent 
for National Glycohemoglobin Standardi­
zation Program (NGSP)-certified assays 
(ngsp.org). Thus, A1C testing should be 
performed routinely in all people with di­
abetes at initial assessment and as part 
of continuing care. Measurement approxi­
mately every 3 months determines whether 
glycemic goals have been reached and 
maintained. Adults with type 1 or type 2 di­
abetes who have achieved and are main­
taining glucose levels within their goal range 
may only need A1C testing twice a year. In­
dividuals with less stable glucose levels, 
those with intensive care plans, or those 
not meeting their treatment goals may re­
quire more frequent testing, typically every 
3 months, with additional assessments as 
needed. Point-of-care A1C testing can offer 
timely opportunities for treatment adjust­
ments during appointments with health 
care professionals, although point-of-care 
tests may be less accurate than laboratory 
A1C assays (5).
The A1C test is an indirect measure 
of average glycemia. Factors that affect 
hemoglobin or red blood cells may af­
fect A1C; see section 2, “Diagnosis and 
Classification of Diabetes,” for details. 
For example, conditions that affect red 
blood cell turnover (e.g., hemolytic anemia 
and other anemias, glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency, recent blood 
transfusion, use of drugs that stimulate 
erythropoiesis, kidney failure, and preg­
nancy) can interfere with the accuracy 
of A1C (6). Some hemoglobin variants 
can interfere with some A1C assays; 
however, most assays in use in the U.S. 
are accurate in individuals who are het­
erozygous for the most common var­
iants (7). A1C cannot be measured in 
individuals with sickle cell disease (HbSS) 
or other homozygous hemoglobin var­
iants (e.g., HbEE), since these individuals 
lack HbA (8). In individuals with condi­
tions that interfere with the interpreta­
tion of A1C, alternative approaches to 
monitoring glycemic status should be 
used, including self-monitoring of blood 
glucose, CGM, and/or the use of glycated 
serum protein assays (discussed below). 
A1C does not provide a measure of 
glycemic variability, real-time glucose 
levels, or hypoglycemia. For individu­
als prone to glycemic variability, espe­
cially people with type 1 diabetes or 
type 2 diabetes with insulin deficiency 
and/or treatment with intensive insulin 
therapy, glycemic status is best evalu­
ated by the combination of results from 
BGM or CGM and A1C. Discordant re­
sults between A1C and BGM or CGM 
can occur due to high glycemic variabil­
ity, inaccurate BGM or CGM measure­
ment, or inaccurate A1C due to the 
factors discussed above.
As discussed in section 2, “Diagnosis and 
Classification of Diabetes,” there is contro­
versy regarding the clinical significance of 
differences in A1C by self-reported race 
and ethnicity (9–12). There is an emerging 
understanding of genetic determinants that 
may modify the association between A1C 
and glucose levels (13). However, race and 
ethnicity are not good proxies for these ge­
netic differences that are likely present in a 
small fraction of individuals of all racial 
groups. Therefore, race and ethnicity should 
not be considerations for how A1C is 
used clinically for glycemic monitoring. 
Limitations of laboratory tests and with­
in-person variability in glucose and A1C 
underscore the importance of using mul­
tiple approaches to glycemic monitoring 
and further evaluation of discordant re­
sults in all racial or ethnic groups.
Serum Glycated Protein Assays as 
Alternatives to A1C
Fructosamine and glycated albumin are 
alternative measures of glycemia that are 
approved for clinical use for monitoring 
glycemic status in people with diabetes. 
Fructosamine reflects total glycated serum 
proteins (mostly albumin). Glycated albu­
min assays reflect the proportion of total 
albumin that is glycated. Due to the turn­
over rate of serum protein, fructosamine 
and glycated albumin reflect glycemia 
over the past 2–4 weeks, a shorter-term 
time frame than that of A1C. Fructosamine 
and glycated albumin are highly correlated 
in people with diabetes, and the perfor­
mance of modern assays is typically excel­
lent. Fructosamine and glycated albumin 
have been linked to long-term compli­
cations in epidemiologic cohort studies 
(14–18). However, there have been few 
clinical trials, and the evidence base sup­
porting the use of these biomarkers to 
monitor glycemic status is much weaker 
than that for A1C. In people with diabetes 
who have conditions where the interpreta­
tion of A1C may be problematic or when 
A1C cannot be measured (e.g., homozy­
gous hemoglobin variants), fructosamine 
or glycated albumin may be useful alterna­
tives to monitor glycemic status (8).
Correlation Between A1C and Blood 
Glucose Monitoring and Continuous 
Glucose Monitoring
Table 6.1—Equivalent A1C levels and estimated average glucose (eAG)
A1C (%)
A1C (mmol/mol)
eAG mg/dL*
eAG mmol/L*
5
31
97 (76–120)
5.4 (4.2–6.7)
6
42
126 (100–152)
7.0 (5.5–8.5)
7
53
154 (123–185)
8.6 (6.8–10.3)
8
64
183 (147–217)
10.2 (8.1–12.1)
9
75
212 (170–249)
11.8 (9.4–13.9)
10
86
240 (193–282)
13.4 (10.7–15.7)
11
97
269 (217–314)
14.9 (12.0–17.5)
12
108
298 (240–347)
16.5 (13.3–19.3)
Data in parentheses are 95% CI. A calculator for converting A1C results into eAG, in either 
mg/dL or mmol/L, is available at professional.diabetes.org/eAG. *These estimates are based 
on ADAG data of ∼2,700 glucose measurements over 3 months per A1C measurement in 
507 adults with type 1, type 2, or no diabetes. The correlation between A1C and average 
glucose was 0.92 (19,20). Adapted from Nathan et al. (19).
Table 6.1 provides rough equivalents of 
A1C and mean glucose levels based on 
data from the international A1C-Derived 
Average Glucose (ADAG) study. The ADAG 
study assessed the correlation between 
A1C and frequent BGM and CGM in 507 
adults (83% non-Hispanic White) with 
type 1, type 2, and no diabetes (19,20). 
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) 
and the American Association for Clinical 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                             
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
S133 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Chemistry have determined that the 
correlation (r = 0.92) in the ADAG trial is 
strong enough to justify reporting both 
the A1C result and the estimated average 
glucose (eAG) result when a clinician or­
ders the A1C test. Clinicians should note 
that the mean plasma glucose numbers in 
Table 6.1 are based on ∼2,700 readings 
per A1C measurement in the ADAG trial.
Caveats in interpretation of Table 6.1
include that these data are from a single 
study published in 2008. Mean glucose in 
the ADAG study was calculated from a 
combination of measurements from an 
early CGM system and capillary glucose, 
intermittently, during a 3-month period. 
This older system required calibration sev­
eral times a day using a self-monitoring 
glucose meter. It is unclear how generaliz­
able these estimates are to mean glucose 
measurements obtained using modern 
and generally more accurate CGM sys­
tems. The comparability of A1C and 
mean glucose from CGM systems will 
depend on the number of days of CGM 
wear, timing of the A1C measurement 
relative to the CGM wear period, cali­
bration and accuracy of both the glu­
cose meter and the CGM system, the lag 
time between interstitial glucose and ve­
nous glucose (which varies among individu­
als and within individuals based on physical 
activity and health status), and any factors 
that affect A1C or red blood cell turnover 
(see section 2, “Diagnosis and Classification 
of Diabetes”).
Glycemic Assessment by Blood 
Glucose Monitoring
For many people with diabetes, glucose 
monitoring, either using BGM by capillary 
(finger-stick) devices and/or CGM in addi­
tion to regular A1C testing, is key for 
achieving glycemic goals. Major clinical 
trials of insulin-treated individuals have 
included BGM as part of multifactorial in­
terventions to demonstrate the benefit 
of intensive glycemic management on di­
abetes complications (21). BGM is thus 
an integral component of effective ther­
apy for individuals taking insulin. In re­
cent years, CGM has become a standard 
method for glucose monitoring for most 
people with type 1 diabetes and people 
with type 2 diabetes treated with insulin. 
Both approaches to glucose monitoring 
allow people with diabetes to evaluate 
individual responses to therapy and as­
sess whether glycemic goals are being 
safely achieved. The specific needs and 
goals of individuals with diabetes should 
dictate BGM frequency and timing. Please 
refer to section 7, “Diabetes Technology,” 
for a more complete discussion of the use 
of BGM and CGM.
Glycemic Assessment by Continuous 
Glucose Monitoring
CGM is particularly useful in people with 
diabetes who are at risk for hypoglycemia 
and in people with type 1 diabetes (21). 
Use of CGM in type 2 diabetes (as well as 
in several other forms of diabetes) is 
growing, especially in people who are 
taking insulin. TIR is a useful metric of 
glycemic status. A 10- to 14-day CGM 
assessment of TIR, with CGM wear of 
70% or higher, and other CGM metrics 
can be used to assess glycemic status 
and are useful in clinical management 
(22–26). TIR, and especially mean CGM 
glucose, correlates with A1C (27–31). 
TBR (<70 and <54 mg/dL [<3.9 and 
<3.0 mmol/L]) and TAR (>180 mg/dL 
[>10.0 mmol/L]) are useful parameters 
for insulin dose adjustments, reevaluation 
of the treatment plan, and real-time detec­
tion, prevention, and treatment of hypo­
glycemia and significant hyperglycemia. 
High coefficient of variation (>36%) 
has also been related to occurrence of 
hypoglycemia (32). The international 
consensus on CGM provides guidance 
on CGM metrics (Table 6.2) and their 
clinical interpretation (33). To make these 
metrics actionable, standardized reports 
with visual summaries have been imple­
mented (33) and help individuals with 
diabetes and health care professionals in­
terpret the data to guide treatment de­
cisions (27,30). Glucose data can be 
analyzed remotely to guide adjustment 
to diabetes therapy (34–36).
Table 6.2—CGM metrics for clinical care in nonpregnant individuals with type 1 or type 2 diabetes
Metric
Interpretation
Goals
Metrics for valid CGM wear
-
Wear time
Number of days CGM device is worn
≥14-day wear for pattern management
Active percentage time
Percent of time CGM device is active
70% of time active out of 14 days
Glycemic metrics
-
Mean glucose
Mean of glucose values
*
Glucose management indicator (GMI)
Calculated value approximating A1C (not 
always equivalent)
*
Glucose coefficient of variation (CV)
Spread of glucose values
≤36%†
TAR >250 mg/dL (>13.9 mmol/L)
Percent of time in level 2 hyperglycemia
<5% (most adults); <10% (older adults with 
complex/intermediate health)
TAR >180 mg/dL (>10 mmol/L)
Percent of time in level 1 hyperglycemia
<25% (most adults); <50% (older adults with 
complex/intermediate health)‡
TIR 70–180 mg/dL (3.9–10.0 mmol/L)
Percent of time in range
>70% (most adults); >50% (older adults with 
complex/intermediate health)
TBR <70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L)
Percent of time in level 1 hypoglycemia
<4% (most adults); <1% (older adults with 
complex/intermediate health)§
TBR <54 mg/dL (<3.0 mmol/L)
Percent of time in level 2 hypoglycemia
<1%
CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; TAR, time above range; TBR, time below range; TIR, time in range. *Goals for these values are not stan­
dardized. †Some studies suggest that lower coefficient of variation targets (<33%) provide additional protection against hypoglycemia for 
those receiving insulin or sulfonylureas. ‡Goals are for level 1 and level 2 hyperglycemia combined. §Goals are for level 1 and level 2 hypogly­
cemia combined. Adapted from Battelino et al. (33).
Published data from two retrospec­
tive studies suggest a strong correlation 
between TIR and A1C, with a goal of 
>70% TIR aligning with an A1C of ∼7% 
(∼53 mmol/mol) (25,28). Note that the 
goals of therapy displayed in Table 6.2
S134 
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises                                         
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
serve as values to guide changes in 
therapy. For older adults with complex 
or intermediate health using CGM, the 
recommended percent time spent in 
goal range of 70–180 mg/dL is 50% (or 
12 h per day) and the recommended time 
spent in hypoglycemia of less than 70 mg/dL 
should not be more than 1%, or 15 min 
per day, to minimize hypoglycemia risk 
(33,37–40). In this population, more 
permissive hyperglycemia is allowed (up 
to 50% of the time in 24 h) if required to 
prevent hypoglycemia.
GLYCEMIC GOALS
For all populations, it is critical that 
glycemic goals be woven into an individ­
ualized, person-centered strategy (41). 
The glycemic goals for many nonpregnant 
adults are shown in Table 6.3, and Fig. 6.1
summarizes how A1C and CGM goals should 
be individualized by each person’s health, 
function, capacity for self-management, 
potential for the treatment plan to cause 
hypoglycemia, and other modifying fac­
tors. For example, less stringent goals are 
appropriate for individuals with significant 
functional and cognitive impairments. For 
more details regarding glycemic goals in 
older adults, please refer to section 13, 
“Older Adults.” For glycemic goals in chil­
dren and adolescents, please refer to sec­
tion 14, “Children and Adolescents.” For 
glycemic goals during pregnancy, please 
refer to section 15, “Management of 
Diabetes in Pregnancy.”
Table 6.3—Summary of glycemic goals for many nonpregnant adults with 
diabetes
A1C
<7.0% (<53 mmol/mol)*†
Preprandial capillary plasma glucose
80–130 mg/dL* (4.4–7.2 mmol/L)
Peak postprandial capillary plasma glucose‡
<180 mg/dL* (<10.0 mmol/L)
*More or less stringent glycemic goals may be appropriate for certain individuals. †CGM may be 
used to assess glycemic status as noted in Recommendations 6.3b and 6.3c. Goals should be in­
dividualized based on duration of diabetes, age and life expectancy, comorbid conditions, known 
cardiovascular disease or advanced microvascular complications, impaired awareness of hypogly­
cemia, and individual considerations (per Fig. 6.1). ‡Postprandial glucose may warrant special 
attention if A1C goals are not met despite reaching preprandial glucose goals. Postprandial 
glucose measurements should be made 1–2 h after the beginning of the meal, which is 
generally the timing for peak levels in people with diabetes.
Health care professionals should en­
gage in shared decision-making with 
the individual (as well as with family 
members and care partners) to establish 
treatment goals and should adjust goals 
to improve safety and medication-taking 
behavior particularly in the setting of 
changing health status. Setting specific 
glycemic (and other) treatment goals 
during clinical consultations has been 
demonstrated to improve glycemic out­
comes for individuals with diabetes (42).
Recommendations
6.3a An A1C goal of <7% (<53 mmol/ 
mol) is appropriate for many nonpreg­
nant adults without severe hypoglyce­
mia or hypoglycemia affecting health or 
quality of life. A
6.3b A goal time in range of >70% in 
people using CGM is appropriate for 
many nonpregnant adults. B
6.3c A goal percent time <70 mg/dL 
(<3.9 mmol/L) of <4% (or <1% for 
older adults) and a goal percent time 
<54 mg/dL (<3.0 mmol/L) of <1% are 
recommended in people using CGM 
to prevent hypoglycemia. Deintensify 
or modify therapy if these goals are 
not met. B
6.4 Lower A1C goals (e.g., <6.5% 
[<48 mmol/mol]) may be appropriate 
for individuals with diabetes with good 
health and function and low treatment 
risks (e.g., hypoglycemia) and burdens 
(see Fig. 6.1). B
6.5 Less stringent glycemic goals may 
be appropriate for individuals with 
significant cognitive and/or functional 
limitations, frailty, or severe comorbid­
ities or where the harms of treatment, 
including hypoglycemia, are greater 
than the benefits. B
6.6 Deintensify hypoglycemia-causing 
medications (insulin, sulfonylureas, or 
meglitinides), or switch to a medica­
tion class with lower hypoglycemia 
risk, for individuals who are at high 
risk for hypoglycemia, within individu­
alized glycemic goals. B
6.7 Deintensify diabetes medications for 
individuals for whom the harms and/or 
burdens of treatment may be greater 
than the benefits, within individualized 
glycemic goals. B
6.8 Reassess glycemic goals based on the 
individualized criteria shown in Fig. 6.1. E
6.9 Set a glycemic goal during consul­
tations to improve outcomes. A
Glucose Lowering and Microvascular 
Complications
The Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial (DCCT) (43), a prospective random­
ized controlled trial of intensive (mean 
A1C ∼7% [∼53 mmol/mol]) versus 
standard (mean A1C ∼9% [∼75 mmol/ 
mol]) glycemic management in people 
with type 1 diabetes, showed definitively 
that better glycemic status is associated 
with 50–76% reductions in rates of de­
velopment and progression of microvascu­
lar complications (retinopathy, neuropathy, 
and chronic kidney disease). Follow-up of 
the DCCT cohorts in the Epidemiology of 
Diabetes Interventions and Complications 
(EDIC) study (44,45) demonstrated persis­
tence of these microvascular benefits over 
two decades despite the fact that the gly­
cemic separation between the treatment 
groups diminished and disappeared during 
follow-up.
The Kumamoto study (46) and UK 
Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) 
(47,48) examined the effects of “intensive 
glycemic control” among people with short- 
duration type 2 diabetes, although glycemic 
lowering in these studies was not intensive 
by current standards (mean A1C was 7.1% 
vs. 9.4% in Kumamoto and 7.0% vs. 7.9% 
in UKPDS). These trials found lower rates of 
microvascular complications in the interven­
tion arms, with long-term follow-up of the 
UKPDS cohorts showing enduring ef­
fects on most microvascular complica­
tions (49). These studies highlight the 
long-term benefits of early glycemic 
lowering in type 2 diabetes.
Additionally, the DCCT (43) and UKPDS 
(50) studies demonstrated a curvilinear re­
lationship between attained A1C level and 
microvascular complications in type 1 and 
type 2 diabetes, respectively. Thus, on a 
population level, the greatest number of 
complications will be averted by taking in­
dividuals with diabetes from very high to 
moderate A1C levels. These analyses also 
suggest that further lowering of A1C from 
7% to 6% (53 mmol/mol to 42 mmol/mol) 
is associated with added reduction in the 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                             
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
S135 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
risk of microvascular complications, but 
the absolute risk reductions become much 
smaller and may be outweighed by the 
increasing risk in hypoglycemia when using 
medications that cause hypoglycemia 
(e.g., insulin and insulin secretagogues) or 
requiring glucose-lowering polypharmacy. 
The implication of these findings is that 
A1C goals between 6% and 7% are appro­
priate, and treatment does not necessarily 
need to be deintensified, in the setting of 
low hypoglycemia risk, low treatment risks 
and burdens, and long life expectancy (i.e., 
sufficient time horizon to derive benefit 
from glucose lowering). Several glucose- 
lowering medication classes—notably, met­
formin, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor 
agonists (GLP-1 RAs), dual GIP and GLP-1 
RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, sodium–glucose 
cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, and di­
peptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors—are unlikely 
to cause hypoglycemia, making it possible 
for many individuals to achieve lower glyce­
mic goals with a low risk for hypoglycemia 
(see section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches 
to Glycemic Treatment”). Moreover, CGM 
use was not as common when the DCCT 
and UKPDS trials were conducted and auto­
mated insulin delivery systems were not 
available; these have been shown to 
improve glucose levels without increas­
ing hypoglycemia.
Figure 6.1—Individualized A1C and CGM goals for nonpregnant adults. Select the glycemic goal based on individual health and function as described at the 
top of the figure. Consider modifying to a more or less stringent goal according to the factors listed in the table. Older adults are classified as healthy (few co­
existing chronic illnesses, intact cognitive and functional status), as having complex/intermediate health (multiple coexisting chronic illnesses, two or more in­
strumental impairments to activities of daily living, or mild to moderate cognitive impairment), or as having very complex/poor health (long-term care or 
end-stage chronic illnesses, moderate to severe cognitive impairment, or two or more impairments to activities of daily living). Select glycemic goals that 
avoid symptomatic hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia in all individuals. Consider individuals’ resources and support systems to safely achieve glycemic goals. 
Incorporate the preferences and goals of people with diabetes through shared decision-making. CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; TAR, time above 
range; TBR, time below range; TIR, time in range. 
Among individuals with type 2 diabetes, 
three landmark trials (Action to Control 
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes [ACCORD], 
Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: 
Modifying Factors
Favor more stringent goal
Favor less stringent goal
Short diabetes duration
Long diabetes duration
Low hypoglycemia risk
High hypoglycemia risk
Low treatment risks and burdens
High treatment risks and burdens
Pharmacotherapy with cardiovascular, kidney, weight, 
or other benefits
Pharmacotherapy without nonglycemic benefits
No cardiovascular complications
Established cardiovascular complications
Few or minor comorbidities
Severe, life-limiting comorbidities
Older adults with 
very complex/
poor health
Any adults 
with limited life 
expectancy
Good health and 
function, low 
treatment risks 
and burdens
Older adults 
with complex/
intermediate 
health
Healthy 
older 
adults
Most 
adults
A1C goals
.5
7.0%
.5%
No A1C goal
70%
—
—
• 
0
—
1%
%
• 
1%
1%
%
• 
—
50%
Avoid 
symptomatic 
hyperglycemia
• 
—
10%
S136 
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Preterax and Diamicron MR Controlled 
Evaluation [ADVANCE], and Veterans Af­
fairs Diabetes Trial [VADT]) were conducted 
to examine the effects of near normaliza­
tion of blood glucose on cardiovascular 
outcomes. The ADVANCE and VADT trials 
found modest reduction in nephropathy 
with intensive glycemic management; 
ACCORD was stopped after a median of 
3.5 years due to higher mortality in the in­
tervention arm (51–55). Importantly, these 
landmark studies were conducted prior to 
the approval of GLP-1 RAs, dual GIP and 
GLP-1 RA, and SGLT2 inhibitors, and inten­
sive glucose lowering was achieved pre­
dominantly through greater use of insulin 
and other medications. Findings from these 
studies, including the concerning increase in 
mortality in the intensive treatment arm of 
ACCORD, suggest caution is needed in 
treating diabetes to near-normal A1C 
goals in people with long-standing type 2 
diabetes using medications with a high 
risk for hypoglycemia and with other 
adverse effects and no additional cardio- 
kidney-metabolic benefits.
Glucose Lowering and 
Cardiovascular Disease Outcomes
The DCCT in individuals with type 1 diabe­
tes and the UKPDS, ACCORD, ADVANCE, 
and VADT studies in type 2 diabetes all 
sought to address whether intensive gly­
cemic management reduced cardiovascu­
lar disease (CVD) events (43,51,52,54). 
ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VADT were con­
ducted in relatively older participants with 
a longer duration of diabetes (mean dura­
tion 8–11 years) and either CVD or multi­
ple cardiovascular risk factors. Details of 
these studies are reviewed extensively in 
the joint ADA position statement “Intensive 
Glycemic Control and the Prevention of 
Cardiovascular Events: Implications of the 
ACCORD, ADVANCE, and VA Diabetes Tri­
als” (56). No significant reduction in com­
posite CVD events was demonstrated at 
the end of the intervention in any of 
these studies, and ACCORD was stopped 
prematurely at 3.5 years because of an in­
crease in total mortality, particularly sud­
den CVD deaths. Serious concerns with 
the intensive glycemic treatment plan used 
in ACCORD included the rapid escalation of 
therapies, the early use of large doses of in­
sulin, substantial weight gain, and frequent 
hypoglycemia. Blood glucose has subse­
quently been shown to be a weaker inde­
pendent CVD risk factor compared with 
other CVD risk factors, such as hyperten­
sion or hypercholesterolemia.
However, a meta-analysis of individual 
participant data from UKPDS, ACCORD, 
ADVANCE, and VADT demonstrated a sig­
nificant reduction in myocardial infarc­
tions and major CVD events but no 
difference in stroke, heart failure, or mor­
tality between intensive and less intensive 
glycemic management (57). Additionally, 
longer-term epidemiological follow-up of 
these studies also showed a pattern of 
CVD benefit (58–60). In the post-DCCT 
follow-up of the EDIC cohort, participants 
previously randomized to the intensive 
treatment arm had a significant 57% re­
duction in the risk of the composite out­
come of nonfatal myocardial infarction, 
nonfatal stroke, or cardiovascular death 
compared with those previously random­
ized to the standard treatment arm (58). 
The benefit of intensive glycemic manage­
ment in the EDIC cohort of people with 
type 1 diabetes has been shown to persist 
for 30 years and was associated with a 
32% reduction in CVD events (59).
The UKPDS post-trial 20-year observa­
tional follow-up has shown reductions in 
myocardial infarctions and total mortality 
both in the group of individuals with over­
weight treated with metformin and in the 
group previously treated intensively with 
sulfonylureas or insulin (49). Post-trial ob­
servational follow-up of the VADT over 
10 years has also shown a significant re­
duction in the primary outcome of major 
CVD events, with myocardial infarctions 
and heart failure being the most common 
outcomes (60). In contrast, post-trial ob­
servational follow-up of the ADVANCE 
study in the Action in Diabetes and Vascu­
lar Disease Preterax and Diamicron MR 
Controlled Evaluation Post Trial Observa­
tional Study (ADVANCE-ON) demonstrated 
no significant effect on CVD events at 
10 years (61). In the epidemiological 
follow-up of ACCORD in the Action to 
Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes 
Follow-On Study (ACCORDION), the ex­
cess increase in total mortality that was 
seen during 3.5 years of intensive treatment 
was reduced by returning to conventional 
management, and therefore there was no 
difference in total mortality after a total 
of 9 years of follow-up (62). Collectively, 
results of these studies suggest that long- 
term intensive glycemic management may 
reduce CVD events, particularly myocardial 
infarctions, with heterogeneity of results 
likely driven by differences in study treat­
ments and populations.
Importantly, these landmark studies 
in individuals with type 2 diabetes did 
not include GLP-1 RAs, dual GIP and 
GLP-1 RA, and SGLT2 inhibitors, which 
are highly beneficial in subgroups like 
those included in the trials (i.e., individ­
uals with established CVD and those at 
high risk for cardiovascular and kidney 
complications). Subsequent cardiovascu­
lar and kidney outcomes trials of these 
agents were not designed to test higher 
versus lower A1C; therefore, beyond 
limited post hoc analysis of these trials, 
there is limited evidence of the inde­
pendent cardiovascular and kidney ef­
fects of glucose lowering when conferred 
by these medication classes (63). Indeed, 
beneficial effects of GLP-1 RA, dual GIP 
and GLP-1 RA, and SGLT2 inhibitor 
therapies may be mediated by weight 
loss, hemodynamic effects, blood pres­
sure lowering, and anti-inflammatory 
changes rather than glucose lowering 
per se.
As discussed further below, severe 
hypoglycemia is strongly associated 
with cardiovascular events and mortal­
ity (64). Therefore, health care profes­
sionals should be vigilant in preventing 
hypoglycemia and should not aggres­
sively attempt to achieve near-normal 
A1C levels in people in whom such 
goals cannot be safely and reasonably 
achieved. As discussed in section 9, 
“Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic 
Treatment,” addition of SGLT2 inhibitors 
and/or GLP-1–based therapies that have 
demonstrated CVD and kidney benefits 
is recommended in individuals with es­
tablished CVD, chronic kidney disease, 
and heart failure. As outlined in more 
detail in section 9, “Pharmacologic 
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” and 
section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and 
Risk Management,” the cardiovascular 
benefits of SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP-1 RAs 
are not contingent upon A1C lowering; 
therefore, initiation should be considered 
in people with type 2 diabetes and CVD, 
kidney disease, heart failure, and/or obe­
sity independent of the current A1C, A1C 
goal, or metformin therapy. Based on 
these considerations, the following two 
strategies are offered (65): 
1. If already on dual therapy or multi­
ple glucose-lowering therapies and 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                             
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
S137 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
not on an SGLT2 inhibitor or a GLP-1 
RA or dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, con­
sider switching to one of these 
agents with proven cardiovascular 
benefit.
2. Introduce SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP-1 
RAs or a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA in 
people with CVD at A1C goal (inde­
pendent of metformin) for cardiovas­
cular benefit, independent of baseline 
A1C or individualized A1C goal.
Setting and Modifying Glycemic 
Goals
Glycemic goals and management should 
be individualized, with focus on avoiding 
therapeutic inertia to reduce risks of 
acute and chronic diabetes complications 
as well as undue treatment burden and 
adverse effects of therapy. Multiple fac­
tors must be considered when setting 
a glycemic goal, using shared decision- 
making to integrate individual needs, goals, 
and preferences and considering charac­
teristics that influence risks and benefits 
of therapy. In addition to supporting the 
establishment of individualized glycemic 
goals, this approach may optimize en­
gagement and self-efficacy.
The factors to consider in individualiz­
ing goals are depicted in Fig. 6.1. This fig­
ure is not designed to be applied rigidly in 
the care of a given individual but rather to 
be used as a framework to guide clinical 
decision-making (41) and engage people 
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes in shared 
decision-making. More aggressive goals 
may be recommended if they can be 
achieved safely, with an acceptable bur­
den of therapy (including hypoglycemic 
risk), and if life expectancy is sufficient to 
derive benefits of greater glucose low­
ering. Less stringent goals (e.g., A1C up 
to 8% [64 mmol/mol]) may be recom­
mended for individuals with complex 
health status and/or limited life expec­
tancy where benefits of more intensive 
treatment may not be realized or if the 
expected risks and burdens of treat­
ment outweigh the potential benefits. 
Severe or frequent hypoglycemia is an 
absolute indication for the modifica­
tion of treatment plans, including set­
ting higher glycemic goals, if the treatment 
plan requires use of medications associ­
ated with high risk for hypoglycemia (i.e., 
insulin and insulin secretagogues).
Diabetes is a progressive chronic dis­
ease; thus, glycemic goals are likely to 
change over time. Newly diagnosed in­
dividuals and/or those without comor­
bidities that limit life expectancy may 
benefit from more intensive glycemic 
goals proven to prevent microvascular 
complications. Both DCCT/EDIC and UKPDS 
suggested that there is metabolic memory, 
or a legacy effect, in which a finite period 
of intensive glucose lowering yielded ben­
efits that extended for decades after that 
period ended (44–48). However, there are 
no data on the long-term effects of early 
long-term glucose lowering using modern 
treatment strategies. Thus, a finite period 
of intensive treatment to near-normal A1C 
may yield enduring benefits even if treat­
ment is subsequently deintensified as the 
individual’s situation and needs change, 
clinical complexity increases, and the treat­
ment plan required to lower glucose levels 
becomes more complex and/or associ­
ated with hypoglycemia. Thus, glycemic 
goals should be reevaluated over time 
to balance the individualized risks and 
benefits.
Hypoglycemia is the major risk to indi­
viduals treated with insulin, sulfonylur­
eas, or meglitinides, and it is appropriate 
to deintensify these medications where 
there is a high risk for hypoglycemia (see 
HYPOGLYCEMIA RISK ASSESSMENT, below). Switch­
ing a high-hypoglycemia-risk medication 
to lower-hypoglycemia-risk therapy (see 
section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches to 
Glycemic Treatment”) should be consid­
ered if needed to achieve individualized 
glycemic goals or where individuals have 
evidence-based indications for alternative 
medications (e.g., use of SGLT2 inhibitors 
in the setting of heart failure or chronic 
kidney disease and use of GLP-1 RAs in 
the setting of CVD or obesity). Clinicians 
should also consider medication burdens 
other than hypoglycemia, including tolera­
bility, difficulties of administration, impact 
on education or employment, and financial 
cost. These factors should be balanced 
against benefits from glycemic lowering 
and disease-specific benefits that may be 
independent of glycemic lowering (section 9, 
“Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic 
Treatment”). Multiple trials have shown 
that deintensification of diabetes treat­
ment can be achieved successfully and 
safely (66–69). It is important to partner 
with people with diabetes during the de­
intensification process to understand their 
goals of diabetes treatment and agree 
upon appropriate glycemic monitoring, 
glucose levels, and goals of care (70).
HYPOGLYCEMIA ASSESSMENT, 
PREVENTION, AND TREATMENT
Recommendations
6.10 Review history of hypoglycemia 
at every clinical encounter for all indi­
viduals at risk for hypoglycemia, and 
evaluate hypoglycemic events as indi­
cated. C
6.11 Screen individuals at risk for hy­
poglycemia for impaired hypoglyce­
mia awareness at least annually and 
when clinically appropriate. E Refer 
to a trained health care professional 
for evidence-based intervention to 
improve hypoglycemia awareness. A
6.12 Screen individuals at high risk for 
hypoglycemia or with severe and/or 
frequent hypoglycemia for fear of 
hypoglycemia at least annually and 
when clinically appropriate. E Refer 
to a trained health care profes­
sional for evidence-based interven­
tion. A
6.13 Consider an individual’s risk for 
hypoglycemia (see Table 6.5) when 
selecting diabetes medications and 
glycemic goals. B
6.14 Use of CGM is beneficial and 
recommended for individuals at high 
risk for hypoglycemia. A
6.15 Glucose is the preferred treat­
ment for the conscious individual with 
glucose <70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L), al­
though any form of carbohydrate that 
contains glucose may be used. Avoid 
using foods or beverages high in fat 
and/or protein for initial treatment of 
hypoglycemia. Fifteen minutes after 
initial treatment, repeat the treatment 
if hypoglycemia persists. B
6.16 Glucagon should be prescribed for 
all individuals taking insulin or at high 
risk for hypoglycemia. A Family, care­
givers, school personnel, and others 
providing support to these individuals 
should know its location and be edu­
cated on how to administer it. Glucagon 
preparations that do not have to be re­
constituted are preferred. B
6.17 First aid kits should include oral 
glucose for use in treating hypoglyce­
mia. C
6.18 All individuals taking insulin A or 
at risk for hypoglycemia C should re­
ceive structured education for hypo­
glycemia prevention and treatment, 
with ongoing education for those who 
experience hypoglycemic events.
S138 
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises                                         
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Hypoglycemia Definitions and Event 
Rates
Hypoglycemia is often the major limiting 
factor in the glycemic management of 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Recommen­
dations regarding the classification of 
hypoglycemia are outlined in Table 6.4
(71). Level 1 hypoglycemia is defined 
as a measurable glucose concentration 
<70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) and ≥54 
mg/dL (≥3.0 mmol/L). A blood glucose 
concentration of 70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) 
has been recognized as a threshold for 
adrenergic responses to falling glucose 
in people without diabetes. Symptoms 
of hypoglycemia include, but are not 
limited to, shakiness, irritability, confu­
sion, tachycardia, sweating, and hunger 
(72). Because many people with diabe­
tes demonstrate impaired counterregula­
tory responses to hypoglycemia and/or 
experience impaired hypoglycemia 
awareness, a measured glucose level 
<70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) is considered 
clinically important, regardless of symp­
toms. Level 2 hypoglycemia (defined as a 
blood glucose concentration <54 mg/dL 
[<3.0 mmol/L]) is the threshold at which 
neuroglycopenic symptoms begin to occur 
and requires immediate action to resolve 
the hypoglycemic event. If an individual 
has level 2 hypoglycemia without adrener­
gic or neuroglycopenic symptoms, they 
likely have impaired hypoglycemia aware­
ness (discussed further in HYPOGLYCEMIA RISK 
ASSESSMENT, below). This clinical scenario 
warrants investigation and review of the 
treatment plan (73,74). Lastly, level 3 hy­
poglycemia is defined as a severe event 
characterized by altered mental and/or 
physical functioning that requires assis­
tance from another person for recovery, 
irrespective of glucose level.
Table 6.4—Classification of hypoglycemia
Glycemic criteria/description
Level 1
Glucose <70 mg/dL (<3.9 mmol/L) and ≥54 mg/dL (≥3.0 mmol/L)
Level 2
Glucose <54 mg/dL (<3.0 mmol/L)
Level 3
A severe event characterized by altered mental and/or physical status 
requiring assistance for treatment of hypoglycemia, irrespective of 
glucose level
Adapted from Agiostratidou et al. (71).
Hypoglycemia has a broad range of 
negative health consequences (75). Level 
3 hypoglycemia may be recognized or un­
recognized and can progress to loss of 
consciousness, seizure, coma, or death. 
Level 3 hypoglycemia was associated with 
mortality in both the standard and the in­
tensive glycemia arms of the ACCORD 
trial, but the relationships between hypo­
glycemia, achieved A1C, and treatment in­
tensity were not straightforward (76). An 
association of level 3 hypoglycemia with 
mortality was also found in the ADVANCE 
trial and in clinical practice (77,78). Hypo­
glycemia can cause acute harm to the 
person with diabetes or others, especially 
if it causes falls, motor vehicle accidents, 
or other injury (79). Hypoglycemia may 
also cause substantial anxiety that can re­
duce the quality of life of individuals with 
diabetes and their caregivers and may 
contribute to problems with diabetes self- 
management and treatment (80–82). Re­
current level 2 hypoglycemia and/or level 3 
hypoglycemia is an urgent medical issue 
and requires intervention with treatment 
plan adjustment, behavioral intervention, 
delivery of diabetes self-management edu­
cation and support, and use of technology 
to assist with hypoglycemia prevention 
and identification (74,83–86).
Epidemiologic studies of hypoglycemia 
predominantly rely on claims data to as­
sess hypoglycemia-related hospitalizations 
and emergency department visits (87–90). 
These studies do not capture the level 1 
and level 2 hypoglycemia that represent 
the vast majority of hypoglycemic events, 
and they also substantially underesti­
mate level 3 hypoglycemia (87,91,92). 
Nevertheless, they reveal a substantial 
burden of hypoglycemia-related hospital 
utilization in the community (87–90). Level 
1 and level 2 hypoglycemia can be ascer­
tained from individual self-report (93) and 
are strong risk factors for subsequent level 
3 hypoglycemia.
6.19 One or more episodes of level 2 
or 3 hypoglycemia should prompt 
reevaluation of the treatment plan, 
including deintensifying or switching 
diabetes medications if appropriate. B
6.20 Regularly assess cognitive func-
tion; if impaired or declining cognition 
is found, the clinician, person with di-
abetes, and caregiver should increase 
vigilance for hypoglycemia. B
Hypoglycemia Risk Assessment
Assessment of an individual’s risk for hypo­
glycemia includes evaluating clinical risk 
factors as well as relevant social, cultural, 
and economic factors (Table 6.5). Recom­
mendations 6.10–6.20 group individuals 
with diabetes into two hypoglycemia risk 
categories with clinical significance. Indi­
viduals at risk for hypoglycemia are those 
treated with insulin, sulfonylureas, or me­
glitinides; clinically significant hypoglyce­
mia is rare among individuals taking other 
diabetes medication classes (94,95). Indi­
viduals at high risk for hypoglycemia 
are the subset of individuals at risk for 
hypoglycemia who either have a major 
hypoglycemia risk factor or have multiple 
other risk factors (determined by the 
health care professional incorporating clin­
ical judgment) (Table 6.5). This risk stratifi­
cation is based on epidemiologic studies of 
hypoglycemia risk (88,89,94,96–100). 
Validated tools have been developed 
to estimate hypoglycemia risk using 
predominantly electronic health record 
data (101–103). However, these tools 
do not include all of the important hy­
poglycemia risk factors, and more re­
search is needed to determine how 
they can best be incorporated into clin­
ical care.
Among individuals at risk for hypo­
glycemia, prior hypoglycemic events, 
especially level 2 or 3 events, are the 
strongest risk factors for hypoglycemia 
recurrence (95,98,104–106). Hypoglyce­
mia history should be assessed at every 
clinical encounter and should include hy­
poglycemic event frequency, severity, pre­
cipitants, symptoms (or lack thereof), and 
approach to treatment. It is essential to 
correlate glucose readings, both from glu­
cose meters and CGM systems, with 
symptoms and treatment, as individuals 
may experience and treat hypoglycemic 
symptoms without checking their glucose 
level (107), treat normal glucose values as 
hypoglycemic, or tolerate hypoglycemia 
without treatment either because of lack 
of symptoms or to avoid hyperglycemia. 
When low sensor glucose readings occur 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                             
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
S139 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
in low-risk individuals, or occur without 
associated symptoms, causes of artifac­
tual hypoglycemia should be investigated, 
such as compression of a CGM sensor 
during sleep.
Table 6.5—Assessment of hypoglycemia risk among individuals treated with 
insulin, sulfonylureas, or meglitinides
Clinical and biological risk factors
Social, cultural, and economic risk factors
Major risk factors 
• Recent (within the past 3–6 months) 
level 2 or 3 hypoglycemia 
• Intensive insulin therapy* 
• Impaired hypoglycemia awareness 
• Kidney failure 
• Cognitive impairment or dementia 
• History of metabolic surgery 
Major risk factors 
• Food insecurity 
• Low-income status§ 
• Housing insecurity 
• Fasting for religious or cultural reasons 
• Underinsurance 
Other risk factors 
• Multiple recent episodes of level 1 
hypoglycemia 
• Basal insulin therapy* 
• Age ≥75 years† 
• Female sex 
• High glycemic variability‡ 
• Polypharmacy 
• Cardiovascular disease 
• Chronic kidney disease (eGFR  
<60 mL/min/1.73 m2 or albuminuria) 
• Neuropathy 
• Retinopathy 
• Major depressive disorder 
• Severe mental illness 
• Gastroparesis 
• β-Blocker therapy 
Other risk factors 
• Low health literacy 
• Alcohol or substance use disorder 
Major risk factors are those that have a consistent, independent association with a high risk for 
level 2 or 3 hypoglycemia. Other risk factors are those with less consistent evidence or a weaker 
association. These risk factors are identified through observational analyses and are intended to 
be used for hypoglycemia risk stratification. Individuals considered at high risk for hypoglycemia 
are those with ≥1 major risk factor or who have multiple other risk factors (determined by the 
health care professional incorporating clinical judgment) (88, 89, 94, 96–99, 117, 119, 122, 190, 
191, 88, 89, 94, 96–99, 117, 120, 191, 192). Proximal causes of hypoglycemic events (e.g., exer­
cise and sleep) are not included. eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate. *Rates of hypoglyce­
mia are highest for individuals treated with intensive insulin therapy (including multiple daily 
injections of insulin, continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion, or automated insulin delivery sys­
tems), followed by basal insulin, followed by sulfonylureas or meglitinides. Combining treatment 
with insulin and sulfonylureas further increases hypoglycemia risk. †Accounting for treatment 
plan and diabetes subtype, the oldest individuals (aged ≥75 years) have the highest risk for hypo­
glycemia in type 2 diabetes; younger individuals with type 1 diabetes are also at very high risk.
‡Tight glycemic management in randomized trials increases hypoglycemia rates. In observational 
studies, both low and high A1C are associated with hypoglycemia in a J-shaped relationship.
§Includes factors associated with low income, such as living in a socioeconomically deprived 
area.
Individuals at risk for hypoglycemia 
should also be screened for impaired 
hypoglycemia awareness (also called hypo­
glycemia unawareness or hypoglycemia- 
associated autonomic failure) at least 
yearly. Impaired hypoglycemia aware­
ness is defined as not experiencing 
the typical counterregulatory hormone 
release at low glucose levels or the associ­
ated symptoms, which often occurs in in­
dividuals with long-standing diabetes or 
recurrent hypoglycemia (108). Some in­
dividuals with impaired hypoglycemia 
awareness can sense hypoglycemia, but 
only at lower glucose levels or with fewer 
symptoms (109). Individuals with impaired 
hypoglycemia awareness may experience 
confusion as the first sign of hypoglyce­
mia, which can create fear of hypoglyce­
mia and severely impact quality of life 
(109). Impaired hypoglycemia awareness 
dramatically increases the risk for level 3 
hypoglycemia (110). Validated question­
naires for assessing impaired hypoglyce­
mia awareness include the single-question 
Pedersen-Bjergaard (111) and Gold (112) 
tools; the Clarke (113) and HypoA-Q (114) 
tools are longer questionnaires that evalu­
ate multiple domains of impaired hypogly­
cemia awareness. Comparisons between 
these tools largely yield good agree­
ment (115,116). To efficiently screen for 
impaired hypoglycemia awareness in clini­
cal practice, clinicians can ask a single ques­
tion based on these tools such as “Can 
you always feel when your blood glucose 
is low?” and follow “No” responses with 
a more detailed evaluation.
Other notable clinical and biological risk 
factors for hypoglycemia are very young 
age, older age, multimorbidity, cognitive 
impairment, chronic kidney disease and 
kidney failure, CVD, depression, neuropa­
thy, and gastroparesis (94,95,117). Female 
sex has also been found to be an inde­
pendent risk factor for hypoglycemia in 
multiple studies, although the mecha­
nisms of this relationship are unclear 
and require further research (94). Cog­
nitive impairment has a strong bidirec­
tional association with hypoglycemia, 
and recurrent severe hypoglycemic epi­
sodes were associated with a greater 
decline in psychomotor and mental effi­
ciency after long-term follow-up of the 
DCCT/EDIC cohort (118). Therefore, cog­
nitive function should be routinely as­
sessed among older adults with diabetes. 
Hypoglycemia is also a frequent complica­
tion for people with diabetes who have 
undergone metabolic surgery, especially 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (119). Hypoglyce­
mia after metabolic surgery is caused by 
excessive post-meal endogenous insulin 
secretion and typically emerges months 
to years after surgery (120).
There are a number of important so­
cial, cultural, and economic hypoglycemia 
risk factors that should also be consid­
ered. Food insecurity is associated with 
increased risk of hypoglycemia-related 
emergency department visits and hospi­
talizations in low-income households, and 
this was shown to be mitigated by in­
creased federal nutrition program bene­
fits (121). In general, individuals with low 
annual household incomes (95), individu­
als who live in socioeconomically deprived 
areas (98), and individuals who are under­
insured (99) or experiencing housing in­
stability (122) experience higher rates of 
emergency department visits and hospi­
talizations for hypoglycemia. Clinicians 
should also be aware of cultural practices 
that may influence glycemic management 
(which are discussed in detail in section 5, 
“Facilitating Positive Health Behaviors and 
S140 
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises                                         
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Well-being to Improve Health Outcomes”), 
such as fasting as part of religious obser­
vance. Fasting may increase the risk for hy­
poglycemia among individuals treated with 
insulin or insulin secretagogues if not prop­
erly planned for, so clinicians need to en­
gage these individuals to codevelop a 
diabetes treatment plan that is safe and 
respectful of their traditions (123).
Young children with type 1 diabetes 
and older adults, including those with 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes (124,125), are 
noted as being particularly vulnerable to 
hypoglycemia because of their reduced 
ability to recognize hypoglycemic symp­
toms and effectively communicate their 
needs. Individualized glycemic goals, educa­
tion, nutrition intervention, physical activity 
management, medication adjustment, glu­
cose monitoring, and routine clinical sur­
veillance may improve outcomes (108). 
Insulin pumps with automated low-glucose 
suspend and automated insulin delivery 
systems have been shown to be effective 
in reducing hypoglycemia in type 1 diabetes 
(126). For people with type 1 diabetes with 
level 3 hypoglycemia and hypoglycemia un­
awareness that persists despite medical 
treatment, pancreas transplant alone or 
human islet transplantation may be an 
option, but these approaches remain ex­
perimental (127,128). Indeed, recent ob­
servational data have shown persistence 
of severe hypoglycemia even among those 
that used advanced diabetes technologies 
and management approaches, highlighting 
the need for ongoing surveillance of hypo­
glycemic risk (129,130).
Hypoglycemia Treatment
Health care professionals should counsel 
individuals with diabetes to treat hypogly­
cemia with fast-acting carbohydrates at 
the hypoglycemia alert value of 70 mg/dL 
(3.9 mmol/L) or less (131–133). Individuals 
should be counseled to recheck their glu­
cose 15 min after ingesting carbohydrates 
and to repeat carbohydrate ingestion and 
seek care for ongoing hypoglycemia. Emer­
gency medical services should be called for 
people who are unalert or unable to ad­
minister carbohydrates. These instructions 
should be reviewed at each clinical visit.
For most individuals, 15 g carbohydrates 
should be ingested. Individuals using auto­
mated insulin delivery systems should typi­
cally ingest 5–10 g carbohydrates unless 
there is hypoglycemia in conjunction with 
exercise or there has been significant 
overestimation of a carbohydrate/meal 
bolus (134). The acute glycemic response 
to food correlates better with the glucose 
content than with the total carbohydrate 
content. Pure glucose is the preferred ini­
tial treatment, but any form of carbohy­
drate that contains glucose will raise 
blood glucose. People taking acarbose 
should treat hypoglycemia with only pure 
glucose, as acarbose inhibits sucrose 
breakdown, potentially delaying correc­
tion of hypoglycemia if sucrose-containing 
carbohydrates are used (135). Added fat 
may slow and then prolong the acute gly­
cemic response. Dietary protein intake 
may increase insulin secretion and should 
not be used to treat hypoglycemia (136). 
Ongoing insulin activity or insulin secreta­
gogues may lead to recurrent hypoglyce­
mia unless more food is ingested after 
recovery.
Because hypoglycemia may occur in 
workplaces, schools, and other institu­
tions and public settings (87,91,92,137), 
first aid kits (both prepackaged and self- 
made) should include oral glucose for hy­
poglycemia treatment. Notably, current 
guidance for first aid kit composition 
omits glucose (138,139). Options for oral 
glucose products include glucose tablets, 
which have the benefits of a long shelf 
life and easy dosing, and/or glucose gel 
products, which generally have a shorter 
shelf life but may be easier to ingest for 
children and edentulous individuals. In­
structions provided with these products 
should include guidance to only administer 
oral glucose to an alert person, to check 
blood glucose before administering oral 
glucose and 15 min later, and to adminis­
ter 15 g of glucose as initial treatment.
Glucagon
The use of glucagon is indicated for the 
treatment of hypoglycemia in people un­
able or unwilling to consume carbohy­
drates by mouth. All individuals treated 
with insulin or who are at high risk of hy­
poglycemia as discussed above should 
be prescribed glucagon. For these indi­
viduals, clinicians should routinely review 
their access to glucagon, as appropriate 
glucagon prescribing is very low in cur­
rent practice (140–142). An individual 
does not need to be a health care profes­
sional to safely administer glucagon. Those 
in close contact with, or having custodial 
care of, individuals with diabetes pre­
scribed glucagon (e.g., family members, 
roommates, school personnel, coaches, 
childcare professionals, correctional insti­
tution staff, or coworkers) should be in­
structed on the use of glucagon, including 
where the glucagon product is kept and 
when and how to administer it. It is es­
sential that they be explicitly educated to 
never administer insulin to individuals 
experiencing hypoglycemia. Glucagon was 
traditionally dispensed as a powder that 
requires reconstitution prior to injection. 
However, intranasal and ready-to-inject glu­
cagon preparations are now widely avail­
able and are preferred due to their ease of 
administration resulting in more rapid cor­
rection of hypoglycemia (143–145). Al­
though the physical and chemical stability 
of glucagon has improved with newer for­
mulations, care should be taken to replace 
glucagon products when they reach their 
expiration date and to store glucagon 
based on specific product instructions to 
ensure safe and effective use. For currently 
available glucagon products and associated 
costs, see Table 6.6. Health insurance pro­
viders may prefer only select glucagon 
products, so it is important to check indi­
viduals’ insurance coverage and prescribe 
formulary products whenever possible.
Hypoglycemia Prevention
A multicomponent hypoglycemia preven­
tion plan (Table 6.7) is critical to caring for 
individuals at risk for hypoglycemia. Hypo­
glycemia prevention begins by establish­
ing an individual’s hypoglycemia history 
and risk factors, as discussed in HYPOGLYCEMIA 
RISK ASSESSMENT above. Structured education 
for hypoglycemia prevention and treatment 
is critical and has been shown to improve 
hypoglycemia outcomes (146,147). Educa­
tion should ideally be provided through 
a diabetes self-management education 
and support program or by a trained dia­
betes care and education specialist, al­
though these services are not available 
in many areas (148,149). If structured ed­
ucation is not available, clinicians should 
educate individuals at risk for hypoglyce­
mia on hypoglycemia definitions, situa­
tions that may precipitate hypoglycemia 
(e.g., fasting, delayed meals, physical activity, 
and illness), blood glucose self-monitoring, 
avoidance of driving with hypoglycemia, 
step-by-step instructions on hypoglycemia 
treatment as discussed above, and glucagon 
use as appropriate (146).
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                             
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
S141 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
CGM can be a valuable tool for de­
tecting and preventing hypoglycemia in 
many individuals with diabetes, and it is 
recommended for insulin-treated indi­
viduals, especially those using multiple 
daily insulin injections or continuous 
subcutaneous insulin infusion. There is 
clinical trial evidence that CGM reduces 
rates of hypoglycemia in these popula­
tions. CGM can reveal asymptomatic hy­
poglycemia and help identify patterns 
and precipitants of hypoglycemic events 
and provide alarms that can warn indi­
viduals of falling glucose so that they 
can intervene (150,151). CGM may also 
be helpful to reduce hypoglycemia and 
improve quality of life in people with 
hypoglycemia as a complication of met­
abolic surgery (152,153). For more infor­
mation on using BGM and CGM for 
hypoglycemia prevention, see section 7, 
“Diabetes Technology.”
An essential component of hypogly­
cemia prevention is appropriate modifi­
cation to diabetes treatment in the 
setting of intercurrent illness (discussed 
in detail below) or to prevent recurrent 
hypoglycemic events. Level 2 or 3 hypogly­
cemic events in particular should trigger a 
reevaluation of the individual’s diabetes 
treatment plan, with consideration of dein­
tensification of therapy within individual­
ized glycemic goals.
Individuals with impaired hypoglycemia 
awareness should be offered training to 
reestablish awareness of hypoglycemia. 
Fear of hypoglycemia and impaired hypo­
glycemia awareness often co-occur, so in­
terventions aimed at treating one often 
benefit both (154). Several evidence-based 
training programs have been developed 
for this purpose and have been demon­
strated to reduce rates of hypoglycemia 
and improve quality of life among people 
with type 1 diabetes and impaired hypogly­
cemia awareness (74,155,156). However, 
these programs are not currently available 
for clinical use. Similar training can be pro­
vided through qualified behavioral health 
professionals, diabetes care and education 
specialists, or other professionals with ex­
perience in this area, although this ap­
proach has not been evaluated in clinical 
trials. In addition, several weeks of avoid­
ance of hypoglycemia, typically accom­
plished through a temporary relaxation of 
glycemic goals, can improve counterregu­
lation and hypoglycemia awareness in 
many people with diabetes (157). Hence, 
individuals with impaired hypoglycemia 
awareness and recurrent hypoglycemic 
episodes may benefit from short-term re­
laxation of glycemic goals.
Table 6.6—Median monthly (30-day) AWP and NADAC of glucagon formulations 
in the U.S.
Product
Form
Median AWP*  
(min, max)
Median NADAC*  
(min, max)
Dosage
Glucagon
Injection powder  
with diluent for  
reconstitution
$303 ($180, $337)
$242 ($207, $242)
1 mg
Glucagon
Nasal powder
$357
$285
3 mg
Glucagon
Prefilled pen,  
prefilled syringe
$391
$303 ($303, $304)
0.5 mg, 1 mg
Dasiglucagon
Prefilled pen,  
prefilled syringe
$371
$298
0.6 mg
AWP, average wholesale price; max, maximum; min, minimum; NADAC, National Average 
Drug Acquisition Cost. AWP and NADAC prices are as of 1 July 2025. *Calculated per unit 
(AWP [192] or NADAC [193]); median AWP or NADAC is listed alone when only one product 
and/or price is described).
Table 6.7—Components of hypoglycemia prevention for individuals at risk for 
hypoglycemia at initial, follow-up, and annual visits
Hypoglycemia prevention action
Initial  
visit
Every  
follow-up visit
Annual  
visit
Hypoglycemia history assessment
✓
✓
✓
Hypoglycemia awareness assessment
✓
-
✓
Cognitive function and other hypoglycemia risk 
factor assessment
✓
-
✓
Structured individual education for 
hypoglycemia prevention and treatment
✓
✓*
✓*
Consideration of diabetes technology needs
✓
✓
✓
Reevaluation of diabetes treatment plan with 
deintensification, simplification, or agent 
modification as appropriate
✓
✓†
✓†
Glucagon prescription and training for close 
contacts for insulin-treated individuals or 
those at high hypoglycemic risk
✓
-
✓
Training to improve hypoglycemia awareness
✓‡
-
✓‡
The listed frequencies are the recommended minimum; actions for hypoglycemia prevention 
should be taken more often as needed based on clinical judgment. *Indicated with recur­
rent hypoglycemic events or at initiation of medication with a high risk for hypoglycemia.
†Indicated with any level 2 or 3 hypoglycemia, intercurrent illness, or initiating interacting 
medications. ‡Indicated when impaired hypoglycemia awareness is detected.
INTERCURRENT ILLNESS
Stressful events (e.g., illness, trauma, and 
surgery) increase the risk for both hypergly­
cemia and hypoglycemia among individuals 
with diabetes, particularly in the setting of 
underlying clinical complexity and poly­
pharmacy. In severe cases, they may pre­
cipitate hyperglycemic crises, which are 
life-threatening and require immediate 
medical care. Any individuals with diabetes 
experiencing illness or other stressful events 
should be assessed for the need for more 
frequent monitoring of glucose; ketosis- 
prone individuals also require urine or 
blood ketone monitoring. Clinicians should 
reevaluate diabetes treatment during these 
events and make adjustments as appropri­
ate. Specifically, clinicians should consider 
holding metformin and SGLT2 inhibitors 
when oral intake cannot be maintained or 
if there is concern for acute kidney injury 
(158). GLP-1 RAs may need to be held 
for illnesses with significant gastrointestinal 
S142 
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises                                         
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
symptoms (158). Thiazolidinediones should 
be held, and their ultimate reinitiation re­
assessed on an individualized basis, in the 
setting of heart failure exacerbation or 
other conditions with hypervolemia (158). 
In addition, clinicians should be aware of 
medication interactions that may precipitate 
hypoglycemia and modify treatment appro­
priately. Notably, sulfonylureas interact with 
a number of commonly used antimicro­
bials (fluoroquinolones, clarithromycin, 
sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, metroni­
dazole, and fluconazole) that can dramati­
cally increase their effective dose, leading 
to hypoglycemia (159–161). Clinicians 
should consider temporarily decreasing 
or stopping sulfonylureas when these 
antimicrobials are prescribed. It is impor­
tant to provide specific, individualized 
guidance to people with diabetes and 
their caregivers on steps to prevent, de­
tect, and treat significant hypoglycemia, 
hyperglycemia, and other adverse events 
during illness and other stressful events 
as well as to provide guidance on who to 
call with questions (including during non­
clinical hours) and where to seek help for 
different levels of clinical acuity with the 
goal of preventing high-risk illness (158).
For further information on management 
of hyperglycemia in the hospital, see sec­
tion 16, “Diabetes Care in the Hospital.”
HYPERGLYCEMIC CRISES: 
DIAGNOSIS, MANAGEMENT, AND 
PREVENTION
Recommendations
6.21 Review history of hyperglycemic 
crises (i.e., diabetic ketoacidosis and 
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state) at 
every clinical encounter for all individ­
uals with diabetes at risk for these 
events. C
6.22 Provide structured education on 
the recognition, prevention, and man­
agement of hyperglycemic crisis to 
all individuals with type 1 diabetes, 
those with type 2 diabetes who have 
experienced these events, and people 
at high risk for these events. B
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and the 
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) 
are serious, acute, and life-threatening 
hyperglycemic emergencies (162). Over 
the past decade, rates of these hyper­
glycemic crises have increased in both 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes (90,163,164). 
Both DKA and HHS impart a substantial 
risk of subsequent morbidity and mortal­
ity and high associated health care costs 
(165). This section focuses on hyperglyce­
mic crisis risk factors, prevention, and 
outpatient management. The diagnostic 
criteria, clinical presentation, and inpa­
tient management of DKA and HHS are 
described in section 16, “Diabetes Care 
in the Hospital.”
There are a number of clinical factors 
associated with an increased risk of hyper­
glycemic crises (Table 6.8). In addition, 
several studies have reported DKA at the 
presentation of newly diagnosed type 1 
diabetes during or after a coronavirus dis­
ease 2019 (COVID-19) infection. The pre­
cise mechanisms for new-onset diabetes 
in people with COVID-19 are not known, 
but several complex interrelated pro­
cesses may be involved. Some medica­
tion classes can affect carbohydrate 
metabolism and precipitate the devel­
opment of DKA and HHS, including glu­
cocorticoids, antipsychotic medications, 
immune checkpoint inhibitors, and 
SGLT2 inhibitors. The risk of DKA in 
people with type 1 diabetes using 
SGLT2 inhibitors can be 5–17 times 
higher than that in nonusers. In clini­
cal trials of SGLT2 inhibitors in adults with 
type 1 diabetes, fasting β-hydroxybuty­
rate of 0.8 mmol/L or higher increased 
the risk of DKA in the next month by 3.2- 
fold (166). Given the recognized risk of 
DKA with SGLT2 inhibitor use in type 1 dia­
betes, a number of educational initiatives 
have been suggested for prevention and 
early intervention to avert progression 
to severe DKA (167–170). The antici­
pated availability of continuous ketone 
monitoring devices may offer a future 
approach to preventing DKA with and 
without SGLT2 inhibitor use in type 1 di­
abetes (171).
In contrast, observational studies and 
randomized controlled trials have shown 
that DKA is uncommon in people with 
type 2 diabetes treated with SGLT2 inhibi­
tors (0.6–4.9 events per 1,000 patient- 
years) (172). A meta-analysis of four ran­
domized controlled trials found the relative 
risk of DKA in participants with type 2 dia­
betes treated with SGLT2 inhibitors versus 
placebo or active comparator arm to be 
2.46 (95% CI 1.16–5.21), while a meta- 
analysis of five observational studies found 
the relative risk to be 1.74 (95% CI 
1.07–2.83) (173). Risk factors for DKA in 
individuals with type 2 diabetes treated 
with SGLT2 inhibitors include very-low- 
carbohydrate diets and prolonged fasting, 
dehydration, excessive alcohol intake, and 
the presence of autoimmunity, in addition 
to typical precipitating factors (173,174). 
Up to 2% of pregnancies with pregesta­
tional diabetes (most often type 1 dia­
betes) are complicated by DKA. The 
incidence of DKA in gestational diabe­
tes is low (<0.1%) (175). Pregnant indi­
viduals may present with euglycemic DKA 
(glucose <200 mg/dL [11.1 mmol/L]), and 
the diagnosis of DKA may be hindered by 
the presence of mixed acid-based distur­
bances, particularly in the setting of hy­
peremesis. Due to significant risk of 
fetomaternal harm, pregnant individuals 
at risk for DKA should be counseled on 
the signs and symptoms suggestive of 
DKA and seek immediate medical atten­
tion if concern for DKA is present.
Hyperglycemic crisis should be con­
sidered in all individuals presenting with 
polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, vomit­
ing, dehydration, and change in cogni­
tive state. Individuals at risk for DKA 
should be counseled on the early signs 
and symptoms of DKA, provided with 
appropriate tools for ketone measure­
ment (urine and/or blood ketone tests), 
and educated on timely self-manage­
ment of hyperglycemia and hyperketo­
nemia (“sick day advice”) (176–178) to 
prevent clinical deterioration and need 
for acute care. Clinicians should review 
DKA prevention practices and availability 
of ketone monitoring tools at each visit. 
Individuals treated with intensive insulin 
therapy should not stop or hold their 
basal insulin even if not eating, and clini­
cians should provide detailed instructions 
on insulin dose adjustments in the setting 
of illness or fasting to prevent DKA occur­
rence and worsening. Individuals con­
cerned about or experiencing DKA should 
be encouraged to contact their diabetes 
care team immediately. Readily available 
clinical support can help individuals self- 
manage hyperglycemia during illness and 
prevent emergency department and hos­
pital care (179). Individuals at risk for DKA 
should measure ketones in the presence 
of symptoms and potential precipitating 
factors (e.g., illness, missed insulin doses, 
eating disorders), particularly if glucose lev­
els exceed 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L). Use 
of blood ketone monitoring compared 
with urine ketone monitoring in a single 
6-month randomized controlled clinical 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                             
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
S143 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
trial reduced the risk of hospitalization/ 
emergency room management by ap­
proximately 50% (180). When hemody­
namically and cognitively intact, able to 
tolerate oral hydration, and able to admin­
ister subcutaneous insulin, individuals may 
treat mild DKA with frequent blood glucose 
and urine or blood ketone monitoring, 
noncaloric hydration, and subcutaneous in­
sulin administration. However, individuals 
should seek immediate medical attention if 
they are unable to tolerate oral hydration, 
they experience ongoing emesis, blood glu­
cose levels and/or ketone levels do not im­
prove with insulin administration, altered 
mental status is present, or any signs of 
worsening illness occur. Because HHS is 
associated with greater volume depletion 
and is typically triggered by an acute ill­
ness, individuals with suspected HHS 
should be immediately evaluated and 
treated in the inpatient setting.
Table 6.8—Risk factors for hyperglycemic crises
Type 1 diabetes/absolute insulin deficiency
Younger age
Prior history of hyperglycemic crises
Prior history of hypoglycemic crises
Presence of other diabetes complications
Presence of other chronic health conditions (particularly in people with type 2 diabetes)
Presence of behavioral health conditions (e.g., depression, bipolar disorder, and eating disorders)
Alcohol and/or substance use
High A1C level
Insulin rationing
SGLT2 (SGLT1/2) inhibitor use
Social determinants of health
SGLT, sodium–glucose cotransporter. Data are from McCoy et al. (194), Gibb et al. (195), 
Randall et al. (196), Thomas et al. (197), and Borden et al. (198).
A substantial proportion of individu­
als hospitalized with DKA experience 
recurrent episodes (181,182), which under­
scores the importance of engaging individu­
als experiencing these events to identify 
triggers and prevent recurrence. Structured 
diabetes self-management education and 
support that includes problem-solving 
is effective at reducing DKA admissions, 
as are psychological interventions, peer 
support, individual coaching, and behav­
ioral family systems therapy (183,184). 
Given that asubstantial proportion of 
DKA in people with established insulin- 
treated diabetes arises from challenges with 
self-management, those with recurrent 
DKA often require extensive multisystemic 
behavioral interventions (185). Young 
people with established diabetes in the 
pediatric age-group, especially during 
adolescence, experience greater rates 
of DKA than adults with diabetes (186). 
Notably, the majority of DKA cases oc­
cur in those with established diabetes 
compared with those with newly diag­
nosed diabetes, often in association with 
psychosocial challenges, such as disordered 
eating behaviors, and during periods of 
transition, such as from pediatric to adult 
health care when there may be gaps in 
ambulatory care (186–188). In addition 
to challenges with self-management related 
to missed or inadequate insulin doses as 
noted above, a number of factors have 
been associated with DKA, including female 
sex, designation as part of an underrepre­
sented group (notably by race and ethnic­
ity or by migration background), higher 
A1C levels, and higher insulin units/kg/day 
(likely reflecting an increase in dose in re­
sponse to a higher A1C that likely resulted 
from missed insulin) (186–188). Other 
factors associated with DKA include age 
10–14 years, public insurance, and prior 
episodes of DKA; use of insulin pump 
therapy does not appear to be associated 
with increased DKA occurrence in the cur­
rent era.
Individuals who have experienced DKA 
or HHS should be screened for social de­
terminants of health that can contribute 
to or trigger these complications, includ­
ing inadequate access to insulin, other 
glucose-lowering medications, and diabe­
tes durable medical equipment (i.e., glu­
cose monitoring and insulin administration 
devices), and referred to appropriate 
health care and/or community services 
to mitigate these barriers to care (see 
section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health 
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve 
Health Outcomes,” for additional de­
tails). Access to CGM may also decrease 
risk of DKA recurrence (189).
References
1. Deshmukh H, Wilmot EG, Gregory R, et al. 
Effect of flash glucose monitoring on glycemic 
control, hypoglycemia, diabetes-related distress, 
and resource utilization in the Association of 
British Clinical Diabetologists (ABCD) nationwide 
audit. Diabetes Care 2020;43:2153–2160
2. Laiteerapong N, Ham SA, Gao Y, et al. The 
legacy effect in type 2 diabetes: impact of early 
glycemic control on future complications (The 
Diabetes & Aging Study). Diabetes Care 2019;42: 
416–426
3. Stratton IM, Adler AI, Neil HA, et al. 
Association of glycaemia with macrovascular and 
microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes 
(UKPDS 35): prospective observational study. 
BMJ 2000;321:405–412
4. Little RR, Rohlfing CL, Sacks DB, National 
Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program (NGSP) 
Steering Committee. Status of hemoglobin A1c 
measurement and goals for improvement: from 
chaos to order for improving diabetes care. Clin 
Chem 2011;57:205–214
5. Sacks DB, Kirkman MS, Little RR. Point-of-care 
HbA1c in clinical practice: caveats and considerations 
for optimal use. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1104–1110
6. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes 
(KDIGO) Work Group. KDIGO 2022 clinical practice 
guideline for diabetes management in chronic 
kidney disease. Kidney Int 2022;102:S1–S127
7. National Glycohemoglobin Standardization 
Program. HbA1c assay interferences. HbA1c 
methods: effects of hemoglobin variants (HbC, 
HbS, HbE and HbD traits) and elevated fetal 
hemoglobin (HbF). 2022. Accessed 14 August 
2025. Available from https://ngsp.org/interf.asp
8. Sacks DB, Arnold M, Bakris GL, et al. 
Guidelines and recommendations for laboratory 
analysis in the diagnosis and management of 
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 2023;46:e151–
e199
9. Bergenstal RM, Gal RL, Connor CG, et al.; T1D 
Exchange Racial Differences Study Group. Racial 
differences in the relationship of glucose 
concentrations and hemoglobin A1c levels. Ann 
Intern Med 2017;167:95–102
10. Herman WH, Ma Y, Uwaifo G, et al.; Diabetes 
Prevention Program Research Group. Differences 
in A1C by race and ethnicity among patients with 
impaired glucose tolerance in the Diabetes 
Prevention Program. Diabetes Care 2007;30:2453–
2457
11. Saaddine JB, Fagot-Campagna A, Rolka D, et 
al. Distribution of HbA1c levels for children and 
young adults in the U.S.: Third National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey. Diabetes Care 
2002;25:1326–1330
12. Selvin E, Steffes MW, Ballantyne CM, 
Hoogeveen RC, Coresh J, Brancati FL. Racial 
differences in glycemic markers: a cross-sectional 
S144 
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises                                         
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
analysis of community-based data. Ann Intern 
Med 2011;154:303–309
13. Wheeler E, Leong A, Liu C-T, et al.; EPIC-CVD 
Consortium; EPIC-InterAct Consortium; Lifelines 
Cohort Study. Impact of common genetic 
determinants of hemoglobin A1c on type 2 
diabetes risk and diagnosis in ancestrally diverse 
populations: a transethnic genome-wide meta- 
analysis. PLoS Med 2017;14:e1002383
14. Parrinello CM, Selvin E. Beyond HbA1c and 
glucose: the role of nontraditional glycemic 
markers in diabetes diagnosis, prognosis, and 
management. Curr Diab Rep 2014;14:548
15. Rooney MR, Daya N, Tang O, et al. Glycated 
albumin and risk of mortality in the US adult 
population. Clin Chem 2022;68:422–430
16. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Grams M, et al. 
Fructosamine and glycated albumin for risk 
stratification and prediction of incident diabetes 
and microvascular complications: a prospective 
cohort analysis of the Atherosclerosis Risk in 
Communities (ARIC) study. Lancet Diabetes Endo- 
crinol 2014;2:279–288
17. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Lutsey PL, et al. 
Fructosamine and glycated albumin and the risk of 
cardiovascular outcomes and death. Circulation 
2015;132:269–277
18. Nathan DM, McGee P, Steffes MW, Lachin 
JM; DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Relationship of 
glycated albumin to blood glucose and HbA1c 
values and to retinopathy, nephropathy, and 
cardiovascular outcomes in the DCCT/EDIC study. 
Diabetes 2014;63:282–290
19. Nathan DM, Kuenen J, Borg R, Zheng H, 
Schoenfeld D, Heine RJ; A1c-Derived Average 
Glucose Study Group. Translating the A1C assay 
into estimated average glucose values. Diabetes 
Care 2008;31:1473–1478
20. Wei N, Zheng H, Nathan DM. Empirically 
establishing blood glucose targets to achieve 
HbA1c goals. Diabetes Care 2014;37:1048–1051
21. Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al. The 
management of type 1 diabetes in adults. A 
consensus report by the American Diabetes 
Association (ADA) and the European Association 
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 
2021;44:2589–2625
22. Valenzano M, Cibrario Bertolotti I, Valenzano 
A, Grassi G. Time in range-A1c hemoglobin 
relationship in continuous glucose monitoring of 
type 1 diabetes: a real-world study. BMJ Open 
Diabetes Res Care 2021;9:e001045
23. Fabris C, Heinemann L, Beck R, Cobelli C, 
Kovatchev B. Estimation of hemoglobin A1c from 
continuous glucose monitoring data in individuals 
with type 1 diabetes: is time in range all we need? 
Diabetes Technol Ther 2020;22:501–508
24. Ranjan AG, Rosenlund SV, Hansen TW, Rossing 
P, Andersen S, Nørgaard K. Improved time in range 
over 1 year is associated with reduced albuminuria 
in individuals with sensor-augmented insulin pump- 
treated type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2020;43: 
2882–2885
25. Beck RW, Bergenstal RM, Cheng P, et al. 
The relationships between time in range, 
hyperglycemia metrics, and HbA1c. J Diabetes 
Sci Technol 2019;13:614–626
26. Soupal J, Petruzelková L, Grunberger G, et al. 
Glycemic outcomes in adults with T1D are 
impacted more by continuous glucose monitoring 
than by insulin delivery method: 3 years of follow- 
up from the COMISAIR study. Diabetes Care 2020; 
43:37–43
27. Advani A. Positioning time in range in diabetes 
management. Diabetologia 2020;63:242–252
28. Vigersky RA, McMahon C. The relationship of 
hemoglobin A1C to time-in-range in patients with 
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:81–85
29. Avari P, Uduku C, George D, Herrero P, Reddy 
M, Oliver N. Differences for percentage times 
in glycemic range between continuous glucose 
monitoring and capillary blood glucose monitoring 
in adults with type 1 diabetes: analysis of the 
REPLACE-BG dataset. Diabetes Technol Ther 2020; 
22:222–227
30. Kröger J, Reichel A, Siegmund T, Ziegler R. 
Clinical recommendations for the use of the 
ambulatory glucose profile in diabetes care. J 
Diabetes Sci Technol 2020;14:586–594
31. Livingstone R, Boyle JG, Petrie JR. How 
tightly controlled do fluctuations in blood glucose 
levels need to be to reduce the risk of developing 
complications in people with type 1 diabetes? 
Diabet Med 2020;37:513–521
32. Zhu J, Volkening LK, Laffel LM. Distinct 
patterns of daily glucose variability by pubertal 
status in youth with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 
Care 2020;43:22–28
33. Battelino T, Danne T, Bergenstal RM, et al. 
Clinical targets for continuous glucose monitoring 
data interpretation: recommendations from the 
International Consensus on Time in Range. Diabetes 
Care 2019;42:1593–1603
34. Tchero H, Kangambega P, Briatte C, Brunet- 
Houdard S, Retali G-R, Rusch E. Clinical effectiveness 
of telemedicine in diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis 
of 42 randomized controlled trials. Telemed J E 
Health 2019;25:569–583
35. Salabelle C, Ly Sall K, Eroukhmanoff J, et al. 
COVID-19 pandemic lockdown in young people 
with type 1 diabetes: positive results of an 
unprecedented challenge for patients through 
telemedicine and change in use of continuous 
glucose monitoring. Prim Care Diabetes 2021;15: 
884–886
36. Prabhu Navis J, Leelarathna L, Mubita W, et al. 
Impact of COVID-19 lockdown on flash and real- 
time glucose sensor users with type 1 diabetes in 
England. Acta Diabetol 2021;58:231–237
37. Weinstock RS, DuBose SN, Bergenstal RM, et 
al.; T1D Exchange Severe Hypoglycemia in Older 
Adults With Type 1 Diabetes Study Group. Risk 
factors associated with severe hypoglycemia in 
older adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 
2016;39:603–610
38. Punthakee Z, Miller ME, Launer LJ, et al.; 
ACCORD-MIND Investigators. Poor cognitive fun- 
ction and risk of severe hypoglycemia in type 2 
diabetes: post hoc epidemiologic analysis of the 
ACCORD trial. Diabetes Care 2012;35:787–793
39. Cariou B, Fontaine P, Eschwege E, et al. 
Frequency and predictors of confirmed hypo- 
glycaemia in type 1 and insulin-treated type 2 
diabetes mellitus patients in a real-life setting: 
results from the DIALOG study. Diabetes Metab 
2015;41:116–125
40. Bremer JP, Jauch-Chara K, Hallschmid M, 
Schmid S, Schultes B. Hypoglycemia unawareness 
in older compared with middle-aged patients 
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009;32: 
1513–1517
41. Inzucchi SE, Bergenstal RM, Buse JB, et al. 
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 
2015: a patient-centered approach: update to a 
position statement of the American Diabetes 
Association and the European Association for the 
Study of Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2015;38:140–149
42. Whitehead L, Glass C, Coppell K. The 
effectiveness of goal setting on glycaemic control 
for people with type 2 diabetes and prediabetes: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Adv 
Nurs 2022;78:1212–1227
43. Nathan DM, Genuth S, Lachin J, et al.; 
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research 
Group. The effect of intensive treatment of 
diabetes on the development and progression of 
long-term complications in insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993;329:977–986
44. Lachin JM, Genuth S, Cleary P, Davis MD, 
Nathan DM; Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and 
Complications Research Group. Retinopathy and 
nephropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes 
four years after a trial of intensive therapy. N Engl 
J Med 2000;342:381–389
45. Lachin JM, White NH, Hainsworth DP, Sun W, 
Cleary PA, Nathan DM, Diabetes Control and 
Complications Trial (DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes 
Interventions and Complications (EDIC) Research 
Group. Effect of intensive diabetes therapy on the 
progression of diabetic retinopathy in patients with 
type 1 diabetes: 18 years of follow-up in the DCCT/ 
EDIC. Diabetes 2015;64:631–642
46. Ohkubo Y, Kishikawa H, Araki E, et al. Intensive 
insulin therapy prevents the progression of 
diabetic microvascular complications in Japanese 
patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus: a randomized prospective 6-year study. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 1995;28:103–117
47. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) 
Group. Effect of intensive blood-glucose control 
with metformin on complications in overweight 
patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34). Lancet 
1998;352:854–865
48. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. 
Intensive blood-glucose control with sulphonylureas 
or insulin compared with conventional treatment 
and risk of complications in patients with type 2 
diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet 1998;352:837–853
49. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews 
DR, Neil HAW. 10-year follow-up of intensive 
glucose control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 
2008;359:1577–1589
50. Adler AI, Stratton IM, Neil HA, et al. 
Association of systolic blood pressure with macro- 
vascular and microvascular complications of type 2 
diabetes (UKPDS 36): prospective observational 
study. BMJ 2000;321:412–419
51. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, et al.; 
VADT Investigators. Glucose control and vascular 
complications in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N 
Engl J Med 2009;360:129–139
52. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al.; 
ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood 
glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients 
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358: 
2560–2572
53. Ismail-Beigi F, Craven T, Banerji MA, et al.; 
ACCORD trial group. Effect of intensive treatment 
of hyperglycaemia on microvascular outcomes in 
type 2 diabetes: an analysis of the ACCORD 
randomised trial. Lancet 2010;376:419–430
54. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, et al.; 
Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes 
Study Group. Effects of intensive glucose lowering 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                             
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
S145 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358: 
2545–2559
55. Agrawal L, Azad N, Bahn GD, et al.; VADT 
Study Group. Intensive glycemic control improves 
long-term renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes in the 
Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT). Diabetes 
Care 2019;42:e181–e182
56. Skyler JS, Bergenstal R, Bonow RO, et al.; 
American College of Cardiology Foundation; 
American Heart Association. Intensive glycemic 
control and the prevention of cardiovascular 
events: implications of the ACCORD, ADVANCE, 
and VA diabetes trials: a position statement of 
the American Diabetes Association and a scientific 
statement of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation and the American Heart Association. 
Diabetes Care 2009;32:187–192
57. Turnbull FM, Abraira C, Anderson RJ, et al.; 
Control Group. Intensive glucose control and 
macrovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetologia 2009;52:2288–2298
58. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial 
(DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions 
and Complications (EDIC) Study Research Group. 
Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular 
outcomes in type 1 diabetes: the DCCT/EDIC 
study 30-year follow-up. Diabetes Care 2016;39: 
686–693
59. Nathan DM, Zinman B, Cleary PA, et al.; 
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT)/ 
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and 
Complications (EDIC) Study Research Group. 
Modern-day clinical course of type 1 diabetes 
mellitus after 30 years’ duration: the Diabetes 
Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of 
Diabetes Interventions and Complications and 
Pittsburgh Epidemiology of Diabetes Compli- 
cations Experience (1983–2005). Arch Intern 
Med 2009;169:1307–1316
60. Hayward RA, Reaven PD, Wiitala WL, et al.; 
VADT Investigators. Follow-up of glycemic control 
and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. 
N Engl J Med 2015;372:2197–2206
61. Zoungas S, Chalmers J, Neal B, et al.; 
ADVANCE-ON Collaborative Group. Follow-up of 
blood-pressure lowering and glucose control in 
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2014;371: 
1392–1406
62. ACCORD Study Group. Nine-year effects of 
3.7 years of intensive glycemic control on cardio- 
vascular outcomes. Diabetes Care 2016;39:701–
708
63. Buse JB, Bain SC, Mann JFE, et al.; LEADER 
Trial Investigators. Cardiovascular risk reduction 
with liraglutide: an exploratory mediation analysis 
of the LEADER trial. Diabetes Care 2020;43: 
1546–1552
64. Lee AK, Warren B, Lee CJ, et al. The 
association of severe hypoglycemia with incident 
cardiovascular events and mortality in adults 
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2018;41: 
104–111
65. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al. 
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 
2018. a consensus report by the American Diabetes 
Association (ADA) and the European Association 
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 
2018;41:2669–2701
66. Munshi MN, Slyne C, Segal AR, Saul N, Lyons 
C, Weinger K. Simplification of insulin regimen in 
older adults and risk of hypoglycemia. JAMA 
Intern Med 2016;176:1023–1025
67. Pratley RE, Rosenstock J, Heller SR, et al. 
Reduced glucose variability with glucose- 
dependent versus glucose-independent therapies 
despite similar glucose control and hypoglycemia 
rates in a randomized, controlled study of older 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Diabetes 
Sci Technol 2018;12:1184–1191
68. Heller SR, Pratley RE, Sinclair A, et al. 
Glycaemic outcomes of an individualized treat- 
ment approach for older vulnerable patients: a 
randomized, controlled study in type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (IMPERIUM). Diabetes Obes Metab 2018; 
20:148–156
69. Grant RW, Peterson I, McCloskey JM, et al. 
Diabetes deprescribing in older adults: a ran- 
domized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2025;185: 
926–935
70. Pilla SJ, Meza KA, Schoenborn NL, Boyd CM, 
Maruthur NM, Chander G. A qualitative study of 
perspectives of older adults on deintensifying 
diabetes medications. J Gen Intern Med 2023;38: 
1008–1015
71. Agiostratidou G, Anhalt H, Ball D, et al. 
Standardizing clinically meaningful outcome 
measures beyond HbA1c for type 1 diabetes: a 
consensus report of the American Association of 
Clinical Endocrinologists, the American Association 
of Diabetes Educators, the American Diabetes 
Association, the Endocrine Society, JDRF Inter- 
national, The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley 
Charitable Trust, the Pediatric Endocrine Society, 
and the T1D Exchange. Diabetes Care 2017;40: 
1622–1630
72. Hepburn DA, Deary IJ, MacLeod KM, Frier BM. 
Structural equation modeling of symptoms, 
awareness and fear of hypoglycemia, and personality 
in patients with insulin-treated diabetes. Diabetes 
Care 1994;17:1273–1280
73. Polonsky WH, Fortmann AL, Price D, Fisher L. 
“Hyperglycemia aversiveness”: investigating an 
overlooked problem among adults with type 1 
diabetes. J Diabetes Complications 2021;35:107925
74. Amiel SA, Potts L, Goldsmith K, et al. A parallel 
randomised controlled trial of the Hypoglycaemia 
Awareness Restoration Programme for adults with 
type 1 diabetes and problematic hypoglycaemia 
despite optimised self-care (HARPdoc). Nat Commun 
2022;13:2229
75. Sreenan S, Andersen M, Thorsted BL, 
Wolden ML, Evans M. Increased risk of severe 
hypoglycemic events with increasing frequency 
of non-severe hypoglycemic events in patients 
with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Ther 
2014;5:447–458
76. Bonds DE, Miller ME, Bergenstal RM, et al. 
The association between symptomatic, severe 
hypoglycaemia and mortality in type 2 diabetes: 
retrospective epidemiological analysis of the 
ACCORD study. BMJ 2010;340:b4909
77. Zoungas S, Patel A, Chalmers J, et al.; ADVANCE 
Collaborative Group. Severe hypoglycemia and risks 
of vascular events and death. N Engl J Med 
2010;363:1410–1418
78. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Ziegenfuss JY, Shah 
ND, Wermers RA, Smith SA. Increased mortality of 
patients with diabetes reporting severe hypo- 
glycemia. Diabetes Care 2012;35:1897–1901
79. Bloomfield HE, Greer N, Newman D, et al. 
Predictors and Consequences of Severe Hypo- 
glycemia in Adults with Diabetes - A Systematic 
Review of the Evidence. Washington, DC, 
Department of Veterans Affairs, 2012. Accessed 
23 September 2025. Available from https:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23256228
80. Rossi MC, Nicolucci A, Ozzello A, et al.; 
HYPOS-1 Study Group of AMD. Impact of severe 
and symptomatic hypoglycemia on quality of life 
and fear of hypoglycemia in type 1 and type 2 
diabetes. Results of the Hypos-1 observational 
study. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2019;29:736–
743
81. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Ziegenfuss JY, 
Shah ND, Wermers RA, Smith SA. Self-report of 
hypoglycemia and health-related quality of life in 
patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Endocr 
Pract 2013;19:792–799
82. Leiter LA, Boras D, Woo VC. Dosing 
irregularities and self-treated hypoglycemia in 
type 2 diabetes: results from the Canadian 
cohort of an international survey of patients and 
healthcare professionals. Can J Diabetes 2014;38: 
38–44
83. Ghandi K, Pieri B, Dornhorst A, Hussain S. A 
comparison of validated methods used to assess 
impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia in type 1 
diabetes: an observational study. Diabetes Ther 
2021;12:441–451
84. Khunti K, Alsifri S, Aronson R, et al.; HAT 
Investigator Group. Impact of hypoglycaemia on 
patient-reported outcomes from a global, 24- 
country study of 27,585 people with type 1 and 
insulin-treated type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin 
Pract 2017;130:121–129
85. Choudhary P, Amiel SA. Hypoglycaemia in 
type 1 diabetes: technological treatments, their 
limitations and the place of psychology. Dia- 
betologia 2018;61:761–769
86. Hopkins D, Lawrence I, Mansell P, et al. 
Improved biomedical and psychological outcomes 
1 year after structured education in flexible insulin 
therapy for people with type 1 diabetes: the U.K. 
DAFNE experience. Diabetes Care 2012;35:1638–
1642
87. Karter AJ, Moffet HH, Liu JY, Lipska KJ. 
Surveillance of hypoglycemia-limitations of 
emergency department and hospital utilization 
data. JAMA Intern Med 2018;178:987–988
88. Lee AK, Lee CJ, Huang ES, Sharrett AR, Coresh 
J, Selvin E. Risk factors for severe hypoglycemia 
in black and white adults with diabetes: the 
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. 
Diabetes Care 2017;40:1661–1667
89. Pilla SJ, Kraschnewski JL, Lehman EB, et al. 
Hospital utilization for hypoglycemia among 
patients with type 2 diabetes using pooled data 
from six health systems. BMJ Open Diabetes Res 
Care 2021;9:e002153
90. McCoy RG, Herrin J, Galindo RJ, et al. Rates 
of hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic emergencies 
among U.S. adults with diabetes, 2011–2020. 
Diabetes Care 2023;46:e69–e71
91. Mattishent K, Loke YK. Detection of 
asymptomatic drug-induced hypoglycemia using 
continuous glucose monitoring in older people - 
Systematic review. J Diabetes Complications 2018; 
32:805–812
92. Ratzki-Leewing A, Black JE, Kahkoska AR, et 
al. Severe (level 3) hypoglycaemia occurrence in 
a real-world cohort of adults with type 1 or 2 
diabetes mellitus (iNPHORM, United States). 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2023;25:3736–3747
93. Au NH, Ratzki-Leewing A, Zou G, et al. Real- 
world incidence and risk factors for daytime and 
nocturnal non-severe hypoglycemia in adults 
S146 
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises                                         
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
with type 2 diabetes mellitus on insulin and/or 
secretagogues (InHypo-DM study, Canada). Can J 
Diabetes 2022;46:196–203 e192
94. Silbert R, Salcido-Montenegro A, Rodriguez- 
Gutierrez R, Katabi A, McCoy RG. Hypoglycemia 
among patients with type 2 diabetes: epidemiology, 
risk factors, and prevention strategies. Curr Diab 
Rep 2018;18:53
95. McCoy RG, Lipska KJ, Van Houten HK, Shah 
ND. Association of cumulative multimorbidity, 
glycemic control, and medication use with 
hypoglycemia-related emergency department 
visits and hospitalizations among adults with 
diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2020;3:e1919099
96. Yun J-S, Ko S-H, Ko S-H, et al. Presence of 
macroalbuminuria predicts severe hypoglycemia 
in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 10-year follow- 
up study. Diabetes Care 2013;36:1283–1289
97. Galindo RJ, Ali MK, Funni SA, et al. 
Hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic crises among 
U.S. adults with diabetes and end-stage kidney 
disease: population-based study, 2013–2017. 
Diabetes Care 2022;45:100–107
98. Kurani SS, Heien HC, Sangaralingham LR, et 
al. Association of area-level socioeconomic 
deprivation with hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic 
crises in US adults with diabetes. JAMA Netw 
Open 2022;5:e2143597
99. Jiang DH, Herrin J, Van Houten HK, McCoy RG. 
Evaluation of high-deductible health plans and 
acute glycemic complications among adults with 
diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6:e2250602
100. Scheuer SH, Andersen GS, Carstensen B, et 
al. Trends in incidence of hospitalization for 
hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis in 
individuals with type 1 or type 2 diabetes with 
and without severe mental illness in Denmark 
from 1996 to 2020: a nationwide study. Diabetes 
Care 2024;47:1065–1073
101. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Lipska KJ, et al. 
Development and validation of a tool to identify 
patients with type 2 diabetes at high risk of 
hypoglycemia-related emergency department or 
hospital use. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:1461–
1470
102. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Moffet HH, et al. 
Revalidation of the hypoglycemia risk stratification 
tool using ICD-10 codes. Diabetes Care 2019;42: 
e58–e59
103. Chow LS, Zmora R, Ma S, Seaquist ER, 
Schreiner PJ. Development of a model to predict 
5-year risk of severe hypoglycemia in patients 
with type 2 diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Res 
Care 2018;6:e000527
104. Miller CD, Phillips LS, Ziemer DC, Gallina DL, 
Cook CB, El-Kebbi IM. Hypoglycemia in patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Arch Intern Med 
2001;161:1653–1659
105. Davis TME, Brown SGA, Jacobs IG, Bulsara 
M, Bruce DG, Davis WA. Determinants of severe 
hypoglycemia complicating type 2 diabetes: the 
Fremantle diabetes study. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2010;95:2240–2247
106. Quilliam BJ, Simeone JC, Ozbay AB. Risk 
factors for hypoglycemia-related hospitalization 
in patients with type 2 diabetes: a nested case- 
control study. Clin Ther 2011;33:1781–1791
107. Pilla SJ, Park J, Schwartz JL, et al. 
Hypoglycemia communication in primary care 
visits for patients with diabetes. J Gen Intern 
Med 2021;36:1533–1542
108. Seaquist ER, Anderson J, Childs B, et al. 
Hypoglycemia and diabetes: a report of a 
workgroup of the American Diabetes Association 
and the Endocrine Society. Diabetes Care 2013; 
36:1384–1395
109. Wild D, von Maltzahn R, Brohan E, 
Christensen T, Clauson P, Gonder-Frederick L. A 
critical review of the literature on fear of 
hypoglycemia in diabetes: implications for 
diabetes management and patient education. 
Patient Educ Couns 2007;68:10–15
110. Schopman JE, Geddes J, Frier BM. Prevalence 
of impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia and 
frequency of hypoglycaemia in insulin-treated type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2010;87:64–68
111. Pedersen-Bjergaard U, Færch L, Thorsteinsson 
B. The updated Pedersen-Bjergaard method for 
assessment of awareness of hypoglycaemia in type 1 
diabetes. Dan Med J 2022;69:A01220041
112. Gold AE, MacLeod KM, Frier BM. Frequency 
of severe hypoglycemia in patients with type I 
diabetes with impaired awareness of hypoglycemia. 
Diabetes Care 1994;17:697–703
113. Clarke WL, Cox DJ, Gonder-Frederick LA, 
Julian D, Schlundt D, Polonsky W. Reduced 
awareness of hypoglycemia in adults with IDDM. 
A prospective study of hypoglycemic frequency 
and associated symptoms. Diabetes Care 1995; 
18:517–522
114. Speight J, Barendse SM, Singh H, et al. 
Characterizing problematic hypoglycaemia: iterative 
design and preliminary psychometric validation of 
the Hypoglycaemia Awareness Questionnaire 
(HypoA-Q). Diabet Med 2016;33:376–385
115. Høi-Hansen T, Pedersen-Bjergaard U, 
Thorsteinsson B. Classification of hypoglycemia 
awareness in people with type 1 diabetes in 
clinical practice. J Diabetes Complications 2010;24: 
392–397
116. Henao-Carrillo DC, Sierra-Matamoros FA, 
Carrillo Algarra AJ, García-Lugo JP, Hernández- 
Zambrano SM. Validation of the hypoglycemia 
awareness questionnaire to assess hypoglycemia 
awareness in patients with type 2 diabetes 
treated with insulin. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2023; 
17:102917
117. Homko C, Siraj ES, Parkman HP. The impact 
of gastroparesis on diabetes control: patient 
perceptions. J Diabetes Complications 2016;30: 
826–829
118. Jacobson AM, Ryan CM, Braffett BH, et al.; 
DCCT/EDIC Research Group. Cognitive performance 
declines in older adults with type 1 diabetes: results 
from 32 years of follow-up in the DCCT and EDIC 
Study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:436–445
119. Fischer LE, Wolfe BM, Fino N, et al.; LABS 
Investigators. Postbariatric hypoglycemia: symptom 
patterns and associated risk factors in the 
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery study. 
Surg Obes Relat Dis 2021;17:1787–1798
120. Singh E, Vella A. Hypoglycemia after gastric 
bypass surgery. Diabetes Spectrum 2012;25:217–221
121. Basu S, Berkowitz SA, Seligman H. The 
monthly cycle of hypoglycemia: an observational 
claims-based study of emergency room visits, 
hospital admissions, and costs in a commercially 
insured population. Med Care 2017;55:639–645
122. Sharan R, Wiens K, Ronksley PE, et al. The 
association of homelessness with rates of diabetes 
complications: a population-based cohort study. 
Diabetes Care 2023;46:1469–1476
123. Ibrahim M, Davies MJ, Ahmad E, et al. 
Recommendations for management of diabetes 
during Ramadan: update 2020, applying the 
principles of the ADA/EASD consensus. BMJ 
Open Diabetes Res Care 2020;8:e001248
124. Whitmer RA, Karter AJ, Yaffe K, Quesenberry 
CP, Selby JV. Hypoglycemic episodes and risk of 
dementia in older patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. JAMA 2009;301:1565–1572
125. DuBose SN, Weinstock RS, Beck RW, et al. 
Hypoglycemia in older adults with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Technol Ther 2016;18:765–771
126. Bergenstal RM, Klonoff DC, Garg SK, et al.; 
ASPIRE In-Home Study Group. Threshold-based 
insulin-pump interruption for reduction of hypo- 
glycemia. N Engl J Med 2013;369:224–232
127. Hering BJ, Clarke WR, Bridges ND, et al.; 
Clinical Islet Transplantation Consortium. Phase 3 
trial of transplantation of human islets in type 1 
diabetes complicated by severe hypoglycemia. 
Diabetes Care 2016;39:1230–1240
128. Boggi U, Baronti W, Amorese G, et al. 
Treating type 1 diabetes by pancreas transplant 
alone: a cohort study on actual long-term (10 Years) 
efficacy and safety. Transplantation 2022;106: 
147–157
129. Sherr JL, Laffel LM, Liu J, et al. Severe 
hypoglycemia and impaired awareness of hypo- 
glycemia persist in people with type 1 diabetes 
despite use of diabetes technology: results from 
a cross-sectional survey. Diabetes Care 2024;47: 
941–947
130. Laffel LM, Sherr JL, Liu J, et al. Limitations in 
achieving glycemic targets from CGM data and 
persistence of severe hypoglycemia in adults 
with type 1 diabetes regardless of insulin delivery 
method. Diabetes Care 2025;48:273–278
131. McTavish L, Wiltshire E. Effective treatment 
of hypoglycemia in children with type 1 diabetes: 
a randomized controlled clinical trial. Pediatr 
Diabetes 2011;12:381–387
132. McTavish L, Corley B, Weatherall M, 
Wiltshire E, Krebs JD. Weight-based carbohydrate 
treatment of hypoglycaemia in people with type 1 
diabetes using insulin pump therapy: a randomized 
crossover clinical trial. Diabet Med 2018;35: 
339–346
133. Georgakopoulos K, Katsilambros N, Fragaki M, 
et al. Recovery from insulin-induced hypoglycemia 
after saccharose or glucose administration. Clin 
Physiol Biochem 1990;8:267–272
134. Phillip M, Nimri R, Bergenstal RM, et al. 
Consensus recommendations for the use of 
automated insulin delivery technologies in clinical 
practice. Endocr Rev 2023;44:254–280
135. Richard JL, Rodier M, Monnier L, Orsetti A, 
Mirouze J. Effect of acarbose on glucose and 
insulin response to sucrose load in reactive 
hypoglycemia. Diabete Metab 1988;14:114–118
136. Layman DK, Clifton P, Gannon MC, Krauss 
RM, Nuttall FQ. Protein in optimal health: heart 
disease and type 2 diabetes. Am J Clin Nutr 
2008;87:1571s–1575s
137. Leckie AM, Graham MK, Grant JB, Ritchie 
PJ, Frier BM. Frequency, severity, and morbidity 
of hypoglycemia occurring in the workplace in 
people with insulin-treated diabetes. Diabetes 
Care 2005;28:1333–1338
138. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
Appendix A to § 1910.266 - First-Aid Kits 
(Mandatory). Accessed 10 August 2025. Available 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                             
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
S147 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
from https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/ 
standardnumber/1910/1910.266AppA
139. American Red Cross. Make a first aid kit. 
Accessed 10 August 2025. Available from https:// 
www.redcross.org/get-help/how-to-prepare-for- 
emergencies/anatomy-of-a-first-aid-kit.html
140. Kahn PA, Liu S, McCoy R, Gabbay RA, Lipska K. 
Glucagon use by U.S. adults with type 1 and type 2 
diabetes. J Diabetes Complications 2021;35:107882
141. Herges JR, Galindo RJ, Neumiller JJ, Heien HC, 
Umpierrez GE, McCoy RG. Glucagon prescribing and 
costs among U.S. Adults with diabetes, 2011–2021. 
Diabetes Care 2023;46:620–627
142. Benning TJ, Heien HC, Herges JR, Creo AL, 
Al Nofal A, McCoy RG. Glucagon fill rates and cost 
among children and adolescents with type 1 
diabetes in the United States, 2011–2021. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;206:111026
143. Matsuhisa M, Takita Y, Nasu R, Nagai Y, 
Ohwaki K, Nagashima H. Nasal glucagon as a viable 
alternative for treating insulin-induced hypo- 
glycaemia in Japanese patients with type 1 or type 2 
diabetes: a phase 3 randomized crossover study. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:1167–1175
144. Suico JG, Hövelmann U, Zhang S, et al. 
Glucagon administration by nasal and intramuscular 
routes in adults with type 1 diabetes during insulin- 
induced hypoglycaemia: a randomised, open-label, 
crossover study. Diabetes Ther 2020;11:1591–1603
145. Pieber TR, Aronson R, Christiansen MP, 
Bode B, Junaidi K, Conoscenti V. Efficacy, safety, 
tolerability, and noninferiority phase 3 study of 
glucagon as a ready-to-use room temperature 
liquid stable formulation versus a lyophilised 
formulation for the biochemical recovery and 
symptomatic relief of insulin-induced severe 
hypoglycaemia in adults with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2022;24:1394–1397
146. Powers MA, Bardsley JK, Cypress M, et al. 
Diabetes self-management education and support 
in adults with type 2 diabetes: a consensus 
report of the American Diabetes Association, the 
Association of Diabetes Care & Education 
Specialists, the Academy of Nutrition and 
Dietetics, the American Academy of Family 
Physicians, the American Academy of PAs, the 
American Association of Nurse Practitioners, and 
the American Pharmacists Association. Diabetes 
Care. 2020;43:1636–1649
147. LaManna J, Litchman ML, Dickinson JK, et al. 
Diabetes education impact on hypoglycemia 
outcomes: a systematic review of evidence and 
gaps in the literature. Diabetes Educ 2019;45: 
349–369
148. Strawbridge LM, Lloyd JT, Meadow A, Riley 
GF, Howell BL. Use of Medicare’s diabetes self- 
management training benefit. Health Educ Behav 
2015;42:530–538
149. Rutledge SA, Masalovich S, Blacher RJ, 
Saunders MM. Diabetes self-management education 
programs in nonmetropolitan counties - United 
States, 2016. MMWR Surveill Summ 2017;66:1–6
150. Heinemann L, Freckmann G, Ehrmann D, et al. 
Real-time continuous glucose monitoring in adults 
with type 1 diabetes and impaired hypoglycaemia 
awareness or severe hypoglycaemia treated with 
multiple daily insulin injections (HypoDE): a multi- 
centre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2018;391: 
1367–1377
151. Hermanns N, Heinemann L, Freckmann G, 
Waldenmaier D, Ehrmann D. Impact of CGM on 
the management of hypoglycemia problems: 
overview and secondary analysis of the HypoDE 
study. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2019;13:636–644
152. Cummings C, Jiang A, Sheehan A, et al. 
Continuous glucose monitoring in patients with post- 
bariatric hypoglycaemia reduces hypoglycaemia and 
glycaemic variability. Diabetes Obes Metab 2023; 
25:2191–2202
153. Turk N, Ramanujan S, Shamloo T, Craig C, 
McLaughlin T. Continuous glucose monitoring in 
patients with postbariatric hypoglycemia: effect 
on hypoglycemia and quality of life. J Endocr Soc 
2025;9:bvaf106
154. Yeoh E, Choudhary P, Nwokolo M, Ayis S, 
Amiel SA. Interventions that restore awareness 
of hypoglycemia in adults with type 1 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes 
Care 2015;38:1592–1609
155. Cox DJ, Gonder-Frederick L, Polonsky W, 
Schlundt D, Kovatchev B, Clarke W. Blood glucose 
awareness training (BGAT-2): long-term benefits. 
Diabetes Care 2001;24:637–642
156. Little SA, Speight J, Leelarathna L, et al. 
Sustained reduction in severe hypoglycemia in 
adults with type 1 diabetes complicated by 
impaired awareness of hypoglycemia: two-year 
follow-up in the HypoCOMPaSS randomized clinical 
trial. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1600–1607
157. Cryer PE. Diverse causes of hypoglycemia- 
associated autonomic failure in diabetes. N Engl J 
Med 2004;350:2272–2279
158. Yuang K, Ea McCoy RG. Glycemic 
management in adults with diabetes during 
illness. Clinical Diabetes. 26 September 2025 
[Epub ahead of print]. DOI: 10.2337/cd25-0056
159. Parekh TM, Raji M, Lin Y-L, Tan A, Kuo Y-F, 
Goodwin JS. Hypoglycemia after antimicrobial drug 
prescription for older patients using sulfonylureas. 
JAMA Intern Med 2014;174:1605–1612
160. Lee S, Ock M, Kim H-S, Kim H. Effects of co- 
administration of sulfonylureas and antimicrobial 
drugs on hypoglycemia in patients with type 2 
diabetes using a case-crossover design. Pharma- 
cotherapy 2020;40:902–912
161. Pilla SJ, Pitts SI, Maruthur NM. High 
concurrent use of sulfonylureas and antimicrobials 
with drug interactions causing hypoglycemia. J 
Patient Saf 2022;18:e217–e224
162. Umpierrez GE, Davis GM, ElSayed NA, et al. 
Hyperglycemic crises in adults with diabetes: a 
consensus report. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1257–1275
163. Zhong VW, Juhaeri J, Mayer-Davis EJ. Trends 
in hospital admission for diabetic ketoacidosis in 
adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes in England, 
1998–2013: a retrospective cohort study. Diabetes 
Care 2018;41:1870–1877
164. Everett EM, Copeland TP, Moin T, Wisk LE. 
National trends in pediatric admissions for diabetic 
ketoacidosis, 2006–2016. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2021;106:2343–2354
165. Desai D, Mehta D, Mathias P, Menon G, 
Schubart UK. Health care utilization and burden 
of diabetic ketoacidosis in the U.S. over the past 
decade: a nationwide analysis. Diabetes Care 2018; 
41:1631–1638
166. Bapat P, Dhaliwal S, Song C, et al. Capillary 
ketone level and future ketoacidosis risk in patients 
with type 1 diabetes using sodium-glucose 
cotransporter inhibitors. Diabetes Care 2025;48: 
1016–1021
167. Garg SK, Peters AL, Buse JB, Danne T. 
Strategy for mitigating DKA risk in patients with 
type 1 diabetes on adjunctive treatment with SGLT 
inhibitors: a STICH protocol. Diabetes Technol Ther 
2018;20:571–575
168. Danne T, Garg S, Peters AL, et al. International 
consensus on risk management of diabetic keto- 
acidosis in patients with type 1 diabetes treated 
with sodium-glucose cotransporter (SGLT) inhibitors. 
Diabetes Care 2019;42:1147–1154
169. Goldenberg RM, Gilbert JD, Hramiak IM, 
Woo VC, Zinman B. Sodium-glucose co-transporter 
inhibitors, their role in type 1 diabetes treatment 
and a risk mitigation strategy for preventing 
diabetic ketoacidosis: the STOP DKA protocol. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2019;21:2192–2202
170. Teng R, Kurian M, Close KL, Buse JB, Peters 
AL, Alexander CM. Comparison of protocols to 
reduce diabetic ketoacidosis in patients with type 1 
diabetes prescribed a sodium-glucose cotransporter 
2 inhibitor. Diabetes Spectr 2021;34:42–51
171. Nguyen KT, Xu NY, Zhang JY, et al. 
Continuous ketone monitoring consensus report 
2021. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;16:689–715
172. Colacci M, Fralick J, Odutayo A, Fralick M. 
Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors and 
risk of diabetic ketoacidosis among adults with 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Can J Diabetes 2022;46:10–15.e12
173. Bamgboye AO, Oni IO, Collier A. Predisposing 
factors for the development of diabetic keto- 
acidosis with lower than anticipated glucose levels 
in type 2 diabetes patients on SGLT2-inhibitors: a 
review. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2021;77:651–657
174. Wu X-Y, She D-M, Wang F, et al. Clinical 
profiles, outcomes and risk factors among type 2 
diabetic inpatients with diabetic ketoacidosis and 
hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state: a hospital- 
based analysis over a 6-year period. BMC Endocr 
Disord 2020;20:182
175. Dhanasekaran M, Mohan S, Erickson D, et 
al. Diabetic ketoacidosis in pregnancy: clinical risk 
factors, presentation, and outcomes. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2022;107:3137–3143
176. Be prepared: sick day management. Dia- 
betes Spectrum 2002;15:54–54
177. Watson KE, Dhaliwal K, McMurtry E, et al. 
Sick day medication guidance for people with 
diabetes, kidney disease, or cardiovascular disease: 
a systematic scoping review. Kidney Med 2022;4: 
100491
178. American Diabetes Association. Getting 
sick: planning for sick days. Accessed 6 July 2025. 
Available from https://diabetes.org/getting-sick- 
with-diabetes/sick-days
179. Farrell K, Brunero S, Holmes-Walker DJ, 
Griffiths R, Salamonson Y. Self-management of 
sick days in young people with type 1 diabetes 
enhanced by phone support: a qualitative study. 
Contemp Nurse 2019;55:171–184
180. Laffel LMB, Wentzell K, Loughlin C, Tovar A, 
Moltz K, Brink S. Sick day management using 
blood 3-hydroxybutyrate (3-OHB) compared with 
urine ketone monitoring reduces hospital visits in 
young people with T1DM: a randomized clinical 
trial. Diabet Med 2006;23:278–284
181. Mays JA, Jackson KL, Derby TA, et al. An 
evaluation of recurrent diabetic ketoacidosis, 
fragmentation of care, and mortality across Chicago, 
Illinois. Diabetes Care 2016;39:1671–1676
182. McCoy RG, Herrin J, Lipska KJ, Shah ND. 
Recurrent hospitalizations for severe hypoglycemia 
S148 
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises                                         
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
and hyperglycemia among U.S. adults with diabetes. 
J Diabetes Complications 2018;32:693–701
183. Ehrmann D, Kulzer B, Roos T, Haak T, 
Al-Khatib M, Hermanns N. Risk factors and 
prevention strategies for diabetic ketoacidosis in 
people with established type 1 diabetes. Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol 2020;8:436–446
184. Elliott J, Jacques RM, Kruger J, et al. 
Substantial reductions in the number of diabetic 
ketoacidosis and severe hypoglycaemia episodes 
requiring emergency treatment lead to reduced 
costs after structured education in adults with 
type 1 diabetes. Diabet Med 2014;31:847–853
185. Harris MA, Wagner DV, Heywood M, 
Hoehn D, Bahia H, Spiro K. Youth repeatedly 
hospitalized for DKA: proof of concept for novel 
interventions in children’s healthcare (NICH). 
Diabetes Care 2014;37:e125-e126
186. Garvey KC, Finkelstein JA, Zhang F, LeCates 
R, Laffel L, Wharam JF. Health care utilization 
trends across the transition period in a national 
cohort of adolescents and young adults with type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2509–2517
187. Fritsch M, Rosenbauer J, Schober E, Neu A, 
Placzek K, Holl RW, German Competence Network 
Diabetes Mellitus and the DPV Initiative. Predictors 
of diabetic ketoacidosis in children and adolescents 
with type 1 diabetes. Experience from a large 
multicentre database. Pediatr Diabetes 2011;12: 
307–312
188. Schwartz DD, Erraguntla M, DeSalvo DJ, et 
al. Severe and recurrent diabetic ketoacidosis in 
children and youth with type 1 diabetes: risk and 
protective factors. Diabetes Technol Ther 
2025:10.1089/dia.2025.0128
189. Riveline J-P, Roussel R, Vicaut E, et al. 
Reduced rate of acute diabetes events with flash 
glucose monitoring is sustained for 2 years after 
initiation: extended outcomes from the RELIEF 
study. Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:611–618
190. Misra-Hebert AD, Pantalone KM, Ji X, et al. 
Patient characteristics associated with severe 
hypoglycemia in a type 2 diabetes cohort in a 
large, integrated health care system from 2006 to 
2015. Diabetes Care 2018;41:1164–1171
191. Dimakos J, Cui Y, Platt RW, Renoux C, Filion 
KB, Douros A. Concomitant use of sulfonylureas and 
β-blockers and the risk of severe hypoglycemia 
among patients with type 2 diabetes: a population- 
based cohort study. Diabetes Care 2023;46:377–383
192. Merative. Micromedex RED BOOK. Accessed 
11 August 2025. Available from https://www 
.merative.com/documents/micromedex-red 
-book
193. Data.Medicaid.gov. NADAC (National Average 
Drug Acquisition Cost) 2024. Accessed 1 July 2025. 
Available from https://data.medicaid.gov/dataset/ 
f38d0706-1239-442c-a3cc-40ef1b686ac0#overview
194. McCoy RG, Galindo RJ, Swarna KS, et al. 
Sociodemographic, 
clinical, 
and 
treatment- 
related factors associated with hyperglycemic 
crises among adults with type 1 or type 2 
diabetes in the US from 2014 to 2020. JAMA 
Netw Open 2021;4:e2123471
195. Gibb FW, Teoh WL, Graham J, Lockman KA. 
Risk of death following admission to a UK 
hospital with diabetic ketoacidosis. Diabetologia 
2016;59:2082–2087
196. Randall L, Begovic J, Hudson M, et al. 
Recurrent diabetic ketoacidosis in inner-city 
minority patients: behavioral, socioeconomic, 
and psychosocial factors. Diabetes Care 2011;34: 
1891–1896
197. Thomas M, Harjutsalo V, Feodoroff M, 
Forsblom C, Gordin D, Groop P-H. The long-term 
incidence of hospitalization for ketoacidosis in 
adults with established T1D-a prospective cohort 
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2020;105:dgz003
198. Borden CG, Bakkila BF, Nally LM, Lipska KJ. 
The association between cost-related insulin 
rationing and health care utilization in U.S. 
adults with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2025;48: 
400–404
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                             
Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises
S149 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S132/848848/dc26s006.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
