9. PHARMACOLOGIC APPROACHES TO GLYCEMIC TREATMENT
9. Pharmacologic Approaches to
Glycemic Treatment: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2026
Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S183–S215 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S009
American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for 
Diabetes*
*A complete list of members of the American 
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee 
for Diabetes can be found at https://doi.org/ 
10.2337/dc26-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each contributor 
is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. 9. 
Pharmacologic approaches to glycemic treatment: 
Standards of Care in Diabetes—2026. Diabetes 
Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S183–S215
© 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. 
Readers may use this work for educational, 
noncommercial purposes if properly cited and 
unaltered. The version of record may be linked 
at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA 
permission is required to post this work on any 
third-party site or platform. This publication and its 
contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or 
used for text or data mining, machine learning, 
or similar technologies without prior written 
permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute 
this work may be sent to permissions@diabetes 
.org. More information is available at https:// 
diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes 
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the 
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to 
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee for 
Diabetes, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the 
Standards of Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed descrip­
tion of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading sys­
tem for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional 
Practice Committee members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Read­
ers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at 
professional.diabetes.org/SOC.
PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR ADULTS WITH TYPE 1 DIABETES
Recommendations
9.1 Treat most adults with type 1 diabetes with continuous subcutaneous insulin in­
fusion or multiple daily doses of prandial (injected or inhaled) and basal insulin. A
9.2 For most adults with type 1 diabetes, insulin analogs (or inhaled insulin) 
are preferred over injectable human insulins to minimize hypoglycemia risk. A
9.3 To improve glycemic outcomes and quality of life and to minimize hypo­
glycemia risk, most adults with type 1 diabetes should receive education on 
how to match mealtime insulin doses to carbohydrate intake and fat and pro­
tein intake depending on the person’s or caregiver’s needs or preferences. 
They should also be taught how to modify the insulin dose (correction dose) 
based on concurrent glycemia, glycemic trends (if available), sick-day manage­
ment, and anticipated physical activity. B
9.4 Insulin treatment plans and insulin-taking behaviors should be reevaluated 
at regular intervals (e.g., every 3–6 months) and adjusted to incorporate spe­
cific factors that affect choice of treatment and ensure achievement of indi­
vidualized glycemic goals. E
Insulin Therapy
Insulin treatment is essential for individuals with type 1 diabetes because the hall­
mark of type 1 diabetes is absent or near-absent β-cell function. In addition to hy­
perglycemia, insulinopenia can contribute to other metabolic disturbances like 
hypertriglyceridemia and ketoacidosis as well as tissue catabolism that can be life 
threatening. Severe metabolic decompensation can be, and was, mostly prevented 
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026
S183
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
with once- or twice-daily insulin injec­
tions for the six or seven decades after 
the discovery of insulin. Over the past 
four decades, evidence has accumulated 
supporting more intensive insulin re­
placement, using multiple daily injec­
tions of insulin or continuous subcutaneous 
administration through an insulin pump, 
as providing the best combination of ef­
fectiveness and safety for people with 
type 1 diabetes.
The Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial (DCCT) demonstrated that intensive 
therapy with multiple daily injections or 
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion 
(CSII) reduced A1C and was associated 
with improved long-term outcomes (1–3). 
The study was carried out with short- 
acting (regular) and intermediate-acting 
(NPH) human insulins. In this landmark 
trial, lower A1C with intensive manage­
ment (7.3%) led to ∼50% reductions in mi­
crovascular complications compared with 
9.1% mean A1C in the conventional treat­
ment arm over 6 years of treatment. How­
ever, intensive therapy was associated with 
a higher rate of severe hypoglycemia than 
conventional treatment (62 compared 
with 19 episodes per 100 person-years 
of therapy) (1). Follow-up of participants 
from the DCCT demonstrated fewer mac­
rovascular and microvascular complica­
tions in the group that received intensive 
treatment. Achieving intensive glycemic 
goals during the active treatment period 
of the study had a persistent beneficial im­
pact over the 20 years after the active treat­
ment component of the study ended (1–3).
Insulin replacement plans typically con­
sist of basal insulin, mealtime insulin, and 
correction insulin (Fig. 9.1) (4). Basal insu­
lin includes NPH insulin, long-acting insu­
lin analogs, and continuous delivery of 
rapid-acting insulin via an insulin pump. 
Basal insulin analogs have longer duration 
of action with flatter, more constant and 
consistent plasma concentrations and ac­
tivity profiles than NPH insulin; rapid-acting 
analogs (RAA) have a quicker onset and 
peak and shorter duration of action than 
regular human insulin. In people with 
type 1 diabetes, treatment with analog 
insulins is associated with less hypoglyce­
mia and weight gain and lower A1C 
compared with injectable human insulins 
(5–7). Two injectable ultra-rapid-acting 
analog (URAA) insulin formulations are 
available that contain excipients that ac­
celerate absorption and provide more ac­
tivity in the first portion of their profile 
compared with the other RAA (8,9). In­
haled human insulin has a rapid peak and 
shortened duration of action compared 
with RAA (10) (see also subsection ALTERNA­
TIVE INSULIN ROUTES IN PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR 
ADULTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES). These newer for­
mulations may cause less hypoglycemia 
while improving postprandial glucose ex­
cursions and administration flexibility (in 
relation to prandial intake) compared 
with RAA (10–12). In addition, longer- 
acting basal analogs (U-300 glargine or de­
gludec) may confer a lower hypoglycemia 
risk compared with U-100 glargine in indi­
viduals with type 1 diabetes (13,14).
Representative relative attributes of insulin delivery 
approaches in people with type 1 diabetes
Insulin plans
Greater 
flexibility
Lower risk of 
hypoglycemia
Higher 
costs
+++
+++
$$$
Less-preferred, alternative injected insulin plans
++
++
$$
++
+
$
+
+
$
Continuous insulin infusion plans
Greater 
flexibility
Lower risk of 
hypoglycemia
Higher 
costs
Automated insulin delivery systems
+++++
+++++
$$$$$
Insulin pump with threshold/
predictive low-glucose suspend
++++
++++
$$$$$
Insulin pump therapy without 
automation
+++
+++
$$$$
MDI with LAA + RAA or URAA
MDI with NPH + RAA or URAA
MDI with NPH + short-acting
(regular) insulin
Two daily injections with NPH + short-
acting (regular) insulin or premixed
Figure 9.1—Choices of insulin plans in people with type 1 diabetes. Continuous glucose monitoring improves outcomes with injected or infused in­
sulin and is superior to blood glucose monitoring. Inhaled insulin may be used in place of injectable prandial insulin in the U.S. The number of plus 
or dollar signs is an estimate of relative association of the plan with greater flexibility, lower risk of hypoglycemia, and higher costs between the 
different plans. Cost symbols are reflective of general costs, which may vary for individuals based on various circumstances: insurance coverage, 
discounts, rebates, and other price adjustments involved in prescription sales. LAA, long-acting insulin analog; MDI, multiple daily injections; RAA, 
rapid-acting insulin analog; URAA, injectable ultra-rapid-acting insulin analog or inhaled insulin. Adapted from Holt et al. (4). 
Despite the advantages of insulin ana­
logs in individuals with type 1 diabetes, 
the expense and/or complexity of treat­
ment required for their use may be pro­
hibitive (Table 9.1). There are multiple 
approaches to insulin treatment. The 
S184 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 9.1—Examples of subcutaneous insulin treatment plans
Plans
Timing and distribution
Advantages
Disadvantages
Adjusting doses
Plans that more closely mimic normal insulin secretion
Insulin pump therapy, 
including conventional 
CSII, sensor-augmented 
pump, low-glucose 
suspend; AID systems such 
as hybrid closed loop
Basal delivery of URAA or RAA; 
generally 30–50% of TDD.  
Mealtime and correction: 
URAA or RAA by bolus 
based on ICR and/or ISF and 
target glucose, with premeal 
insulin ∼15 min before 
eating.
Can adjust basal rates for varying 
insulin sensitivity by time of day, 
for exercise, and for sick days.  
Flexibility in meal timing and 
content.  
Pump can deliver insulin in 
increments of fractions of units.  
Potential for integration with CGM 
for AID systems.  
TIR % highest and TBR % lowest 
with: hybrid closed-loop > low- 
glucose suspend > sensor- 
augmented open-loop > 
conventional CSII.
Most expensive plan.  
Must continuously wear one or 
more devices.  
Risk of rapid development of 
ketosis or DKA with interruption 
of insulin delivery.  
Potential reactions to adhesives 
and site infections.  
Most technically complex approach 
(harder for people with lower 
numeracy or literacy skills).
Mealtime insulin: if carbohydrate 
counting is accurate, change ICR 
if glucose after meal consistently 
out of target.  
Correction insulin: adjust ISF and/or 
target glucose if correction does 
not consistently bring glucose 
into range.  
Basal rates: adjust based on 
overnight, fasting or daytime 
glucose outside of activity of 
URAA/RAA bolus.  
AID systems: carbohydrate ratio, 
insulin on board, targets, and/or 
ISF may be adjusted, depending 
on the system; make sure to 
review and adjust manual mode 
settings, if available.
MDI: LAA + flexible doses of 
URAA or RAA at meals
LAA once daily (insulin detemir 
or insulin glargine may 
require twice-daily dosing); 
generally 30–50% of TDD.  
Mealtime and correction: 
URAA or RAA based on ICR 
and/or ISF and target 
glucose.
Can use pens for all components.  
Flexibility in meal timing and 
content.  
Insulin analogs cause less 
hypoglycemia than human 
insulins.
At least four daily injections.  
Most costly insulins.  
Smallest increment of insulin is  
1 unit (0.5 unit with some pens).  
LAAs may not cover strong dawn 
phenomenon (rise in glucose in 
early morning hours) as well as 
pump therapy.
Mealtime insulin: if carbohydrate 
counting is accurate, change ICR 
if glucose after meal consistently 
out of target.  
Correction insulin: adjust ISF and/or 
target glucose if correction does 
not consistently bring glucose 
into range.  
LAA: based on overnight or fasting 
glucose or daytime glucose 
outside of activity time course, 
or URAA or RAA injections.
MDI plans with less flexibility
Four injections daily with 
fixed doses of N and RAA
Pre-breakfast: RAA ∼20% of 
TDD. Pre-lunch: RAA ∼10% 
of TDD.  
Pre-dinner: RAA ∼10% of TDD.  
Bedtime: N ∼50% of TDD.
May be feasible if unable to 
carbohydrate count.  
All meals have RAA coverage.  
N is less expensive than LAAs.
Shorter duration RAA may lead to 
basal deficit during day; may 
need twice-daily N.  
Greater risk of nocturnal 
hypoglycemia with N.  
Requires relatively consistent 
mealtimes and carbohydrate 
intake.
Pre-breakfast RAA: based on BGM 
after breakfast or before lunch.  
Pre-lunch RAA: based on BGM after 
lunch or before dinner.  
Pre-dinner RAA: based on BGM 
after dinner or at bedtime.  
Evening N: based on fasting or 
overnight BGM.
Continued on p. S186
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S185 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 9.1—Continued
Plans
Timing and distribution
Advantages
Disadvantages
Adjusting doses
Four injections daily with 
fixed doses of N and R
Pre-breakfast: R ∼20% of TDD.  
Pre-lunch: R ∼10% of TDD.  
Pre-dinner: R ∼10% of TDD.  
Bedtime: N ∼50% of TDD.
May be feasible if unable to 
carbohydrate count.  
R can be dosed based on ICR and 
correction.  
All meals have R coverage.  
Least expensive insulins.
Greater risk of nocturnal 
hypoglycemia with N.  
Greater risk of delayed post-meal 
hypoglycemia with R.  
Requires relatively consistent 
mealtimes and carbohydrate 
intake.  
R must be injected at least 30 min 
before meal for better effect.
Pre-breakfast R: based on BGM 
after breakfast or before lunch.  
Pre-lunch R: based on BGM after 
lunch or before dinner.  
Pre-dinner R: based on BGM after 
dinner or at bedtime.  
Evening N: based on fasting or 
overnight BGM.
Plans with fewer daily injections
Three injections daily: N + R 
or N + RAA
Pre-breakfast: N ∼40% TDD + R  
or RAA ∼15% TDD.  
Pre-dinner: R or RAA ∼15% 
TDD.  
Bedtime: N ∼30% TDD.
Morning insulins can be mixed in 
one syringe.  
May be appropriate for those who 
cannot take injection in middle 
of day.  
Morning N covers lunch to some 
extent.  
Same advantages of RAAs over R.  
Least (N + R) or less expensive 
insulins than MDI with analogs.
Greater risk of nocturnal 
hypoglycemia with N than LAAs.  
Greater risk of delayed post-meal 
hypoglycemia with R than RAAs.  
Requires relatively consistent 
mealtimes and carbohydrate 
intake.  
Coverage of post-lunch glucose 
often suboptimal.  
R must be injected at least 30 min 
before meal for better effect.
Morning N: based on pre-dinner 
BGM.  
Morning R: based on pre-lunch 
BGM.  
Morning RAA: based on post- 
breakfast or pre-lunch BGM.  
Pre-dinner R: based on bedtime 
BGM.  
Pre-dinner RAA: based on post- 
dinner or bedtime BGM.  
Evening N: based on fasting BGM.
Twice-daily “split-mixed”:  
N + R or N + RAA
Pre-breakfast: N ∼40% TDD + 
R or RAA ∼15% TDD.  
Pre-dinner: N ∼30% TDD + R 
or RAA ∼15% TDD.
Least number of injections for 
people with strong preference 
for this.  
Insulins can be mixed in one 
syringe.  
Least (N + R) or less (N + RAA) 
expensive insulins vs. analogs.  
Eliminates need for doses during 
the day.
Risk of hypoglycemia in afternoon 
or middle of night from N.  
Fixed mealtimes and meal content.  
Coverage of post-lunch glucose 
often suboptimal.  
Difficult to reach targets for blood 
glucose without hypoglycemia.
Morning N: based on pre-dinner 
BGM.  
Morning R: based on pre-lunch 
BGM.  
Morning RAA: based on post- 
breakfast or pre-lunch BGM.  
Evening R: based on bedtime BGM.  
Evening RAA: based on post-dinner 
or bedtime BGM.  
Evening N: based on fasting BGM.
AID, automated insulin delivery; BGM, blood glucose monitoring; CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; CSII, continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion; ICR, insulin-to-carbohydrate ratio; ISF, insulin sen­
sitivity factor; LAA, long-acting analog; MDI, multiple daily injections; N, NPH insulin; R, short-acting (regular) insulin; RAA, rapid-acting analog; TBR, time below range; TDD, total daily insulin dose; TIR, 
time in range; URAA, ultra-rapid-acting analog (inhaled insulin may be considered if appropriate). Adapted from Holt et al. (4).
S186 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
central precept in the management of 
type 1 diabetes is that some form of insu­
lin be given in a defined treatment plan 
tailored to the individual to prevent dia­
betic ketoacidosis (DKA) and minimize 
clinically relevant hypoglycemia while 
achieving the individual’s glycemic goals. 
Reassessment of insulin-taking behavior and 
adjustment of treatment plans to account 
for specific factors, including cost, that affect 
choice of treatment is recommended at reg­
ular intervals (every 3–6 months).
Most studies comparing multiple daily 
injections with CSII have been relatively 
small and of short duration. A systematic 
review and meta-analysis concluded that 
CSII via pump therapy has modest advan­
tages for lowering A1C (−0.30% [95% CI 
−0.58 to −0.02]) and for reducing severe 
hypoglycemia rates in adults (15). Use of 
CSII is associated with improvement in 
quality of life, particularly in areas related 
to fear of hypoglycemia and diabetes dis­
tress, compared with multiple daily injec­
tions of insulin (16,17). However, there is 
no consensus to guide the choice of injec­
tion or pump therapy in a given individ­
ual, and research to guide this decision- 
making is needed (4).
Integration of continuous glucose moni­
toring (CGM) into the treatment plan soon 
after diagnosis improves glycemic outcomes, 
decreases hypoglycemic events, and im­
proves quality of life for individuals with 
type 1 diabetes (18–21). Its use is now 
considered standard of care for most 
people with type 1 diabetes (4) (see sec­
tion 7, “Diabetes Technology”). Although 
nocturnal hypoglycemia is reduced in 
individuals with type 1 diabetes using 
sensor-augmented pump therapy with 
low-glucose suspend and predictive low- 
glucose suspend (22,23), evidence sug­
gests that automated insulin delivery 
(AID) systems are superior for increasing 
percentage of time in range and reduc­
ing hypoglycemia (24–26). AID systems, 
which integrate CSII via an insulin pump, 
a CGM, and a control algorithm to adjust 
insulin delivery in real time based on glu­
cose levels, are safe and effective for 
people with type 1 diabetes. Random­
ized controlled trials (RCTs) and real- 
world studies have demonstrated the 
ability of commercially available systems 
to improve achievement of glycemic 
goals while reducing the risk of hypogly­
cemia (27–32). Data are emerging on the 
safety and effectiveness of open-source 
AID systems (33,34). Intensive insulin 
management with CSII and CGM should 
be considered in individuals with type 1 
diabetes whenever feasible. AID systems 
are preferred for individuals with type 1 
diabetes who can use them safely (inde­
pendently or with caregiver support), as 
they consistently improve time in range, 
lower A1C, and reduce hypoglycemia 
(26,28–31,35–38). When choosing among 
insulin delivery systems, individual pref­
erences, cost, insulin type, dosing plan, 
and self-management capabilities should 
be considered. See section 7, “Diabetes 
Technology,” for a full discussion of insu­
lin delivery devices.
In general, individuals with type 1 dia­
betes require approximately 30–50% of 
their daily insulin as basal and the remain­
der as prandial (39). This proportion de­
pends on several factors, including but 
not limited to carbohydrate consumption, 
age, pregnancy status, and puberty stage 
(4,40–43). Total daily insulin requirements 
can be estimated based on weight, with 
typical doses ranging from 0.4 to 1 unit/ 
kg/day. Higher amounts may be required 
during puberty, the late luteal phase (pre­
menstrual) in menstruating individuals, 
and illness. The American Diabetes Asso­
ciation/JDRF Type 1 Diabetes Sourcebook 
notes 0.5 units/kg/day as a typical start­
ing dose in adults with type 1 diabetes 
who are metabolically stable, with ap­
proximately one-half administered as 
prandial insulin given to manage blood 
glucose after meals and the remaining 
portion as basal insulin to manage glyce­
mia in the periods between meal absorp­
tion (44). In adults newly diagnosed with 
type 1 diabetes, insulin requirements 
at initiation typically range from 0.2 to 
0.6 units/kg/day, with lower doses often 
sufficient in those with continued endog­
enous insulin production (during the par­
tial remission phase or “honeymoon” 
period, or in people presenting outside 
of ketoacidosis) (44). This guideline pro­
vides an algorithm for insulin use for indi­
viduals with type 1 diabetes using insulin 
injections (Fig. 9.2) and detailed informa­
tion on intensification of therapy to meet 
individualized needs. In addition, the Amer­
ican Diabetes Association (ADA) position 
statement “Type 1 Diabetes Management 
Through the Life Span” provides a thorough 
overview of type 1 diabetes treatment (45).
Typical multidose insulin treatment plans 
for adults with type 1 diabetes combine 
premeal prandial insulin with a longer- 
acting basal insulin. The long-acting basal 
dose is titrated to regulate overnight and 
fasting glucose. Postprandial glucose 
excursions are best managed by an 
appropriately timed injection or inhala­
tion of prandial insulin. Prandial insulin 
should ideally be administered before 
meals, although the optimal timing de­
pends on the pharmacokinetics of the for­
mulation (regular, rapid-acting analog, or 
inhaled), the premeal blood glucose level, 
and the anticipated carbohydrate intake. 
Dosing recommendations should there­
fore be individualized. Because physiologic 
insulin secretion varies with glycemia, meal 
size and composition, and tissue demand, 
strategies have evolved to adjust prandial 
doses based on predicted needs. Thus, ed­
ucation on how to adjust prandial insulin 
to account for nutritional intake and the 
correction dose based on premeal glucose 
levels, anticipated activity, and sick-day 
management can be effective and should 
be offered to most individuals (46–51). Ed­
ucation regarding adjustment of prandial 
insulin dose for glycemic trends should be 
provided to individuals who are using 
CGM alone or an AID system (52–55). Fur­
ther adjustment of prandial insulin doses 
for nutritional intake of protein and fat, 
in addition to carbohydrates, is recom­
mended but may be more feasible for in­
dividuals using CSII than for those using 
multiple daily injections (48). With some 
AID systems, use of a simplified meal an­
nouncement method may be an alterna­
tive for prandial insulin dosing (31,56). 
Assessment and education tailored to im­
prove health literacy and numeracy may 
be necessary for individuals to effectively 
use various insulin dosing strategies and 
tools (57,58) (see section 5, “Facilitating 
Positive Health Behaviors and Well-being to 
Improve Health Outcomes,” and section 7, 
“Diabetes Technology”).
The 2021 ADA/European Association 
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD) consen­
sus report on the management of type 1 
diabetes in adults summarizes different 
insulin plans and glucose monitoring strat­
egies in individuals with type 1 diabetes 
(Fig. 9.1 and Table 9.1) (4). An individual’s 
treatment plan and insulin-taking behav­
iors should be frequently reassessed to at­
tain individualized treatment goals and 
assess risk or progression of complications 
and comorbidities. The timing of reassess­
ment may vary based on time since diag­
nosis, ability to attain/maintain treatment 
goals, health status, comorbidities, and in­
dividual needs (4,45,59).
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S187 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Initiation and titration of insulin
INITIATION 
2 coverage
TITRATION Uptitrate or downtitrate as necessary, adjusting basal and prandial doses based on  
 individualized goals for A1C, CGM, and SMBG
Assess adequacy of insulin dose and 
insulin-taking behaviors at every visit
Consider person-specific considerations 
and clinical signs to evaluate for need for 
modification of administration method 
(switch to or from MDI, AID, inhaled insulin) 
and for overbasalization (e.g., elevated 
bedtime-to-morning and/or postprandial-
to-preprandial differential, hypoglycemia 
[aware or unaware], high glucose variability)
Considerations for starting insulin
Choice of insulin(s) and administration method should be based on person-specific considerations 
including progression and severity of insulin deficiency, initial presentation with DKA,1 and/or 
concomitant overweight or obesity  
Glucagon should be prescribed for emergent hypoglycemia
If hypoglycemia is present, adjust basal and/or
prandial insulin based on the timing of 
3,4
If hyperglycemia is present, adjust basal
and/or prandial insulin based on the timing 
and extent of hyperglycemia (e.g., 1
 
units or 
10% dosage adjustments)3,4
If fasting hyperglycemia is present, 
review overnight glucose pattern 
(using CGM, if available) and adjust 
basal insulin, if appropriate
If postprandial hyperglycemia 
is present, assess and educate to 
ensure prandial administration is 
appropriately timed and adjusted 
for nutrient intake (dosing may be 
fixed based on general intake or 
variable based on macronutrient
and/or glycemic trends, depending 
on individual preference and ability)
If A1C, CGM metrics, or SMBG not at goal 
Reassess frequently using CGM and/or SMBG to determine 
individual needs for prandial and basal dosing balance 
Support healthy lifestyle behaviors, deliver diabetes self-management education and 
support, and address social determinants of health to meet individualized treatment goals 
To avoid 
therapeutic 
inertia, reassess 
and modify 
treatment 
regularly 
1. Refer to section 16, "Diabetes Care in the Hospital," for information on care during hospitalizations.
2. Prandial insulin options include: injectable rapid-acting and ultra-rapid-acting analog insulins, injectable short-acting human insulin, and inhaled human insulin.
3. Amount of dosage adjustment may vary between individuals depending on their severity of insulin deficiency and/or insulin re
4. Adjustment may be done by their diabetes care team or by individuals, with guidance provided by their diabetes care team, as frequently as once to twice weekly using the lowest levels or average of the 
Initiation and adjustment of insulin using multiple daily dosing in individuals with type 1 diabetes
Figure 9.2—Insulin initiation and adjustment for people with type 1 diabetes using multiple daily dosing. AID, automated insulin delivery; CGM, 
continuous glucose monitoring; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; MDI, multiple daily injections; SMBG, self-monitoring of blood glucose. 
Insulin Administration Technique
Ensuring that individuals and/or caregivers 
understand correct insulin administration 
technique is important to optimize glyce­
mic management and insulin use safety. 
Advanced insulin injection technique and 
education with FITTER Forward expert rec­
ommendations have been published else­
where outlining best practices for insulin 
administration (60). Proper insulin admin­
istration technique includes the following: 
injection, insertion of patch (for bolus 
patch or fixed-rate patch pump) or infu­
sion set (for CSII or AID systems) into ap­
propriate body areas, or oral inhalation 
(inhaled human insulin); injection or infu­
sion site rotation; appropriate care of 
injection or infusion sites to avoid infec­
tion or other complications; avoidance of 
intramuscular (IM) insulin delivery; and 
filling of the reservoir (for bolus patch, 
CSII, or AID systems) or inhaler (for in­
haled human insulin) depending on the 
method of administration. Selection of 
method of administration (vial and syringe, 
insulin pen, insulin patch, inhaled insulin, 
connected insulin pens/devices, or insulin 
pumps) will depend on a variety of indi­
vidual-specific factors and needs, cost 
and coverage, and individual preferen­
ces. Reassessment of the appropriate 
administration technique should be com­
pleted during routine follow-up.
Exogenously delivered insulin should 
be injected or infused into subcutaneous 
tissue, not intramuscularly. Recommended 
sites for insulin administration include the 
abdomen, thigh, buttock, and upper arm. 
Insulin absorption from IM sites differs 
from that in subcutaneous sites and is also 
influenced by the activity of the muscle. 
Inadvertent IM injection can lead to un­
predictable insulin absorption and variable 
effects on glucose and is associated with 
frequent and unexplained hypoglycemia. 
Size 4-mm pen needles should be used to 
reduce inadvertent IM insulin delivery 
across ages and body types. IM risk is 
higher in younger, leaner individuals, with 
injections into limbs rather than truncal 
S188 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
sites (abdomen, buttocks), and with lon­
ger needles. Short needles (e.g., 4-mm) 
are effective and well tolerated compared 
with longer needles, including in adults 
with obesity (61).
Injection or infusion site rotation is 
necessary to avoid lipohypertrophy, an 
accumulation of subcutaneous fat in re­
sponse to the adipogenic actions of insulin 
at a site of multiple injections. Lipohyper­
trophy appears as soft, smooth raised 
areas several centimeters in breadth and 
can contribute to erratic insulin absorp­
tion, increased glycemic variability, and 
unexplained hypoglycemic episodes. Peo­
ple treated with insulin and/or caregivers 
should receive education about proper in­
jection or infusion site rotation and how 
to recognize and avoid injecting in areas of 
lipohypertrophy (60). As noted in Table 4.1, 
examination of insulin administration sites 
for the presence of lipohypertrophy, as 
well as assessment of administration de­
vice use and injection technique, are key 
components of a comprehensive diabetes 
evaluation and treatment plan. Proper in­
sulin injection, infusion, or inhalation tech­
nique may lead to more effective use of 
this therapy and, as such, holds the po­
tential for improved clinical outcomes.
Noninsulin Treatments for Type 1 
Diabetes
Injectable and oral noninsulin glucose- 
lowering medications have been studied 
for their efficacy as adjuncts to insulin 
treatment of type 1 diabetes. Pramlintide 
is based on the naturally occurring β-cell 
peptide amylin and is approved for use in 
adults with type 1 diabetes. Clinical trials 
have demonstrated a modest reduction 
in A1C (0.3–0.4%) and modest weight loss 
(∼1–2 kg) with pramlintide (62). Similar 
results have been reported for several 
agents currently approved for the treat­
ment of type 2 diabetes. The addition of 
metformin in adults with type 1 diabetes 
was associated with small reductions in 
body weight, insulin dose, and lipid levels 
but did not sustainably improve A1C 
(63,64). The largest clinical trials of glucagon- 
like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) 
in type 1 diabetes have been conducted 
with liraglutide 1.8 mg daily, and results 
showed modest A1C reductions (∼0.4%), 
decreases in weight (∼5 kg), and reduc­
tions in insulin doses (65,66). Higher rates 
of DKA and gastrointestinal side effects 
have limited their use in type 1 diabetes. 
Liraglutide was also assessed for impact 
on C-peptide in individuals with type 1 
diabetes and residual β-cell function. Dur­
ing treatment there was no impact on 
preservation of β-cell function, but with lir­
aglutide discontinuation there was wors­
ening of C-peptide loss compared with 
placebo (67). Small retrospective case se­
ries and pilot studies have revealed poten­
tial benefits on body weight and glycemic 
metrics with addition of semaglutide or 
tirzepatide for individuals with type 1 dia­
betes and obesity (68–72). Prospective 
studies on use of incretin medications (i.e., 
GLP-1 RAs or a dual glucose-dependent 
insulinotropic polypeptide [GIP] and GLP-1 
RA) for individuals with type 1 diabetes are 
ongoing and include evaluation of cardio­
vascular and kidney outcomes and other 
aspects of care (73–76).
Sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) 
inhibitors have been studied in clinical tri­
als in people with type 1 diabetes, and 
results showed improvements in A1C, re­
duced body weight, and improved blood 
pressure (77); however, SGLT2 inhibitor 
use in type 1 diabetes was associated with 
an increased rate of DKA (78). The SGLT1/2 
inhibitor sotagliflozin has been studied in 
clinical trials in people with type 1 diabetes, 
and results showed improvements in A1C 
and body weight (79); however, sotagliflo­
zin use was associated with an eightfold in­
crease in DKA compared with placebo (80). 
The studies that led to the approved indica­
tion for heart failure (HF) excluded individu­
als with type 1 diabetes or a history of DKA 
(81,82). Sotagliflozin is therefore ap­
proved for HF and chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) but contraindicated in type 1 dia­
betes due to DKA risk. See SGLT INHIBITION 
AND RISK OF KETOSIS, later in this section, and 
PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF HEART FAILURE in 
section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and 
Risk Management,” for information on 
risk mitigation with the use of SGLT inhib­
itors in those with type 1 diabetes. The 
risks and benefits of adjunctive agents 
continue to be evaluated, with consensus 
statements providing guidance on selec­
tion of candidates for treatment and pre­
cautions (83).
There are currently no approved thera­
pies for preservation of C-peptide or prolon­
gation of the partial remission (honeymoon) 
phase in individuals with established stage 3 
type 1 diabetes. Teplizumab was approved 
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
(FDA) in 2022 for delay of the progression 
from stage 2 to stage 3 type 1 diabetes (for 
additional guidance for use in early stage 
type 1 diabetes, refer to section 3, 
“Prevention or Delay of Diabetes and 
Associated Comorbidities”), but it is not 
indicated for those with established stage 3 
type 1 diabetes (84). Higher C-peptide 
levels have been associated with better 
A1C, lower risk of retinopathy, lower risk 
of nephropathy, and lower risk of severe 
hypoglycemia (85). Various therapies, in­
cluding verapamil, menin inhibitors, Janus 
kinase inhibitors, antithymocyte globulin, 
several monoclonal antibodies including 
teplizumab, and cell therapies, are cur­
rently under active investigation (86).
SURGICAL TREATMENT OF TYPE 1 
DIABETES
Pancreas and Islet Transplantation
Successful pancreas and islet transplanta­
tion can normalize glucose levels and miti­
gate microvascular complications of type 1 
diabetes. However, people receiving these 
treatments require lifelong immunosup­
pression to prevent graft rejection and/or 
recurrence of autoimmune islet destruc­
tion. Given the potential adverse effects 
of immunosuppressive therapy, pancreas 
transplantation should be reserved for 
people with type 1 diabetes undergoing 
simultaneous kidney transplantation, fol­
lowing kidney transplantation, or for those 
with recurrent ketoacidosis or severe hy­
poglycemia despite optimized glycemic 
management (87). In much of the world, 
allogenic islet transplantation is regu­
lated as an organ transplant. However, in 
the U.S., allogenic islet transplantation is 
regulated as a cell therapy, and the first 
such allogeneic islet cell therapy, donislecel- 
jujn, was approved in 2023. Donislecel is in­
dicated for the treatment of adults with 
type 1 diabetes who are unable to reach 
their A1C goals because of repeated epi­
sodes of severe hypoglycemia despite inten­
sive diabetes management and education 
(88). Alternative islet sources are currently 
under active investigation.
The 2021 ADA/EASD consensus report 
on the management of type 1 diabetes in 
adults offers a simplified overview of indi­
cations for β-cell replacement therapy in 
people with type 1 diabetes (Fig. 9.3) (4).
PHARMACOLOGIC THERAPY FOR 
ADULTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES
Recommendations
9.5 A person-centered shared decision- 
making approach should guide the 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S189 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
choice of glucose-lowering medica­
tions for adults with type 2 diabetes. 
Use medications that provide suffi­
cient effectiveness to achieve and 
maintain intended treatment goals 
with consideration of the effects on 
cardiovascular, kidney, weight, and 
other relevant comorbidities; hypogly­
cemia risk; cost and access; risk for ad­
verse reactions and tolerability; and 
individual preferences (Fig. 9.4 and 
Table 9.2). E
9.6 Consider combination therapy in 
adults with type 2 diabetes for initial 
treatment to shorten time to attain­
ment of individualized glycemic goals. A
9.7 In adults with type 2 diabetes and 
established or high risk of atheroscle­
rotic cardiovascular disease, the treat­
ment plan should include medications 
with demonstrated benefits to reduce 
cardiovascular events (e.g., glucagon- 
like peptide 1 receptor agonist [GLP-1 
RA] and/or sodium–glucose cotrans­
porter 2 [SGLT2] inhibitor) for glyce­
mic management and comprehensive 
cardiovascular risk reduction (irrespective 
of A1C) (Fig. 9.4 and Table 9.2). A
9.8 In adults with type 2 diabetes who 
have heart failure (HF) (with either re­
duced or preserved ejection fraction), 
an SGLT2 inhibitor is recommended 
for both glycemic management and 
prevention of HF hospitalizations (ir­
respective of A1C) (Fig. 9.4). A
9.9a In adults with type 2 diabetes, 
obesity, and symptomatic heart fail­
ure with preserved ejection fraction 
(HFpEF), the glucose-lowering treatment 
plan should include a dual glucose- 
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide 
(GIP) and GLP-1 RA with demonstrated 
benefits for HF-related symptoms and 
reduction in HF events (irrespective of 
A1C). A
9.9b In adults with type 2 diabetes, 
obesity, and symptomatic HFpEF, the 
glucose-lowering treatment plan should 
include a GLP-1 RA with demonstrated 
benefits for HF-related symptoms A 
and/or reduction in HF events (irre­
spective of A1C). B
9.10 In adults with type 2 diabetes 
who have chronic kidney disease (CKD) 
(with confirmed estimated glomerular 
filtration rate [eGFR] 20–60 mL/min/ 
1.73 m2 and/or albuminuria), an SGLT2 
inhibitor or GLP-1 RA with demonstrated 
benefit in this population should be 
used for both glycemic management 
and for slowing progression of CKD and 
reduction in cardiovascular events (ir­
respective of A1C) (Fig. 9.4). The gly­
cemic benefits of SGLT2 inhibitors 
are reduced at eGFR <45 mL/min/ 
1.73 m2. A
9.11 In adults with type 2 diabetes 
and advanced CKD (eGFR <30 mL/ 
min/1.73 m2), a GLP-1 RA is preferred 
for glycemic management due to lower 
risk of hypoglycemia and for cardiovas­
cular event reduction. B Individuals on 
dialysis can be safely initiated or con­
tinued on GLP-1–based therapy (that 
is not dependent on kidney clear­
ance) to reduce cardiovascular risk 
and mortality. C
9.12 In adults with type 2 diabetes, 
metabolic dysfunction–associated stea­
totic liver disease (MASLD), and over­
weight or obesity, consider using a 
GLP-1 RA with demonstrated benefits 
in metabolic dysfunction–associated 
steatohepatitis (MASH) A or a dual 
Simplified overview of indications for β-cell replacement therapy in people with type 1 diabetes
Pancreas after 
kidney
Islet after 
kidney
Simultaneous 
islet and 
kidney
Pancreas 
transplantation 
alone
Simultaneous 
pancreas and 
kidney
Islet 
transplantation 
alone
Balancing surgical risk, metabolic need, and the choice of the individual with diabetes
Severe chronic kidney disease
73 m2)
Severe metabolic complications
•
Hypoglycemia
•
Hypoglycemia unawareness
•
Ketoacidosis
• 
Incapacitating problems with exogenous insulin therapy
•
Failure of insulin-based management to prevent acute 
complications
Living donor kidney
Simultaneous transplantation
Impaired kidney function
Intact/stable kidney function
Figure 9.3—Simplified overview of indications for β-cell replacement therapy in people with type 1 diabetes. The two main forms of β-cell replace­
ment therapy are whole-pancreas transplantation and islet cell transplantation. β-Cell replacement therapy can be combined with kidney trans­
plantation if the individual has kidney failure, which may be performed simultaneously or after kidney transplantation. All decisions about 
transplantation must consider the surgical risk, metabolic need, and the choices of the individual with diabetes. GFR, glomerular filtration rate. 
Adapted from Holt et al. (4). 
S190 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Efficacy for glucose lowering
Very high:
Dulaglutide (high dose), 
semaglutide, tirzepatide, insulin
Combination oral, combination 
High:
pioglitazone, SGLT2i, sulfonylurea
Intermediate:
≈
• 
SGLT2i with proven CVD benefit or vice versa
• Pioglitazone^
• Refer to DSMES to support self-efficacy in achievement of 
treatment goal
• 
identify therapeutic gaps and tailor therapy
• Identify and address SDOH that affect achievement of
treatment goals
with proven 
CVD benefit
If glycemia is above goal
If additional cardiovascular and kidney risk reduction, management of other 
metabolic comorbidities, and/or glycemic lowering is needed
If glycemia is above goal or significant hypoglycemia 
or hyperglycemia or barriers to care are identified
SGLT2i‡ with 
proven CVD 
benefit
measurement is required to confirm CKD
SGLT2i‡ with proven 
HF benefit in current 
or prior symptom s 
of HFrEF or HFpEF
SGLT2i and/or either 
proven benefit in 
symptomatic HFpEF 
and obesity
Efficacy 
for weight 
loss
Very high:
Semaglutide, 
tirzepatide
High:
Dulaglutide, 
liraglutide
Intermediate:
listed above), 
SGLT2i
Neutral:
Metformin, 
Agents with proven or potential benefit in MASLD or MASH
Use insulin in the setting of decompensated cirrhosis
Metformin or other agent (including 
combination therapy) that provides 
adequate efficacy to achieve and
maintain glycemic treatment goals.
Prioritize avoidance of hypoglycemia 
in high risk individuals
Goal: cardiovascular and kidney risk reduction*
Goal: achievement and maintenance
of weight and glycemic goals
To avoid 
therapeutic 
inertia, reassess 
and modify 
treatment 
regularly 
If glycemia is above goal, for individuals 
on SGLT2i, consider incorporating 
SGLT2i‡ with primary evidence 
of reducing CKD progression
• SGLT2i can be started wit h
eGFR ≥20 mL/min/1.73 m
• Glucose-lowering efficacy is reduced
GLP-1 RA# with proven CKD benefit
OR
†  
≈ 
# 
‡ 
^   Low-dose pioglitazone may be better tolerated and similarly effective as higher doses. 
ischemic attack, unstable angina, amputation, and symptomatic or asymptomatic coronary artery disease. Indicators of high risk: While definitions vary, most comprise ≥55 years of age with two or more 
additional risk factors (including obesity, hypertension, smoking, dyslipidemia, or albuminuria).
A strong recommendation is warranted for people with CVD and a weaker recommendation for those with indicators of high risk CVD. Moreover, a higher absolute risk reduction and thus lower numbers needed 
to treat are seen at higher levels of baseline risk and should be factored into the shared decision-making process. See text for details.
For SGLT2is, CV and kidney outcomes trials demonstrate their efficacy in reducing the risks of composite MACE, CV death, all-cause mortality, MI, HHF, and kidney outcomes in individuals with T2D and 
established or high risk of CVD.
(For recommendations for specific conditions, including non-glucose-lowering medications, refer to pertinent sections)
Healthy lifestyle behaviors; diabetes self-management
education and support; social determinants of health
(3–6 months)
+ASCVD†
+Indicators of
high CVD risk
+HF
+CKD
eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m or albuminuria
(ACR ≥3.0 mg/mmol [30 mg/g]). Repeat
+ASCVD/indicators of high CVD risk≈
GLP-1 RA#
+CKD (on maximally tolerated
dose of ACEi or ARB)
with eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73 m
a GLP-1 RA or vice versa
dual GIP/GLP-1 RA
or GLP-1 RA with
For individuals on a GLP-1 RA, consider adding
+Mitigating risk of MASLD or MASH
GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, pioglitazone, or combination of GLP-1 RA with pioglitazone
In people with HF, CKD, established CVD, or multiple risk factors for CVD, the decision to use a GLP-1 RA or SGLT2i with proven benefit should be made irrespective of attainment of glycemic goal.
ASCVD: Defined differently across CVOTs but all included individuals with established CVD (e.g., MI, stroke, and arterial revascularization procedure) and variably included conditions such as transient 
For GLP-1 RAs, CVOTs demonstrate their efficacy in reducing composite MACE, CV death, all-cause mortality, MI, stroke, and kidney end points in individuals with T2D with established or high risk of CVD. One
kidney outcome trial demonstrated benefit in reducing persistent eGFR reduction and CV death for a GLP-1 RA in individuals with CKD and T2D.
+Weight
management
+Achievement and maintenance
of glycemic goals
GLP-1 RA (not
DPP-4i
DPP-4i
injectable (GLP-1 RA  and insulin)
GLP-1 RA (not listed above), metformin,
Consider technology (e.g., diagnostic or personal CGM) to
Use of glucose-lowering medications in the management of type 2 diabetes
Figure 9.4—Use of glucose-lowering medications in the management of type 2 diabetes. The left side of the algorithm prioritizes mitigation of 
diabetes-related complications and end-organ effects, while the right side addresses weight and glucose management goals. ACEi, angiotensincon­
verting enzyme inhibitor; ACR, albumin-to-creatinine ratio; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; 
CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CV, cardiovascular; CVD, cardiovascular disease; CVOT, cardiovascular out­
comes trial; DPP-4i, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor; DSMES, diabetes self-management education and support; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtra­
tion rate; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; HF, heart failure; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; HFrEF, heart 
failure with reduced ejection fraction; HHF, hospitalization for heart failure; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; MASH, metabolic 
dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis; MASLD, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease; MI, myocardial infarction; SDOH, social determi­
nants of health; SGLT2i, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor; T2D, type 2 diabetes. Adapted from Davies et al. (90). 
diabetesjournals.org/care
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S191 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
A holistic, multifaceted, person-centered 
approach that accounts for the complex­
ity of managing type 2 diabetes and its 
complications across the life span is rec­
ommended. Person-specific factors that 
affect choice of treatment include indi­
vidualized glycemic goals (see section 6, 
“Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and 
Hyperglycemic Crises”), individualized 
weight goals (see section 8, “Obesity and 
Weight Management for the Prevention 
and Treatment of Diabetes”), the indi­
vidual’s risk for hypoglycemia, and the in­
dividual’s history of or risk factors for 
cardiovascular, kidney, liver, and other 
comorbidities and complications of dia­
betes (see section 4, “Comprehensive 
Medical Evaluation and Assessment of 
Comorbidities,” section 10, “Cardiovascular 
Disease and Risk Management,” and sec­
tion 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk 
Management”). In addition, treatment 
decisions must consider the tolerability 
and side effect profiles of medications, 
complexity of the medication plan and 
the individual’s capacity to implement it 
given their specific situation and context, 
and the access, cost, and availability of 
medications. Lifestyle modifications and 
health behaviors that improve health 
(see section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health 
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve 
Health Outcomes”) should be empha­
sized along with any pharmacologic 
therapy. Section 13, “Older Adults,” and 
section 14, “Children and Adolescents,” 
have recommendations specific for older 
adults and for children and adolescents 
with type 2 diabetes, respectively. Sec­
tion 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk 
Management,” and section 11, “Chronic 
Kidney Disease and Risk Management,” 
have recommendations for the use of 
glucose-lowering drugs in the management 
of cardiovascular disease and kidney dis­
ease, respectively.
GIP and GLP-1 RA with potential ben­
efits in MASH B for glycemic manage­
ment and as an adjunctive therapy 
to interventions for weight loss.
9.13a In adults with type 2 diabetes 
and biopsy-proven MASH or those at 
high risk for liver fibrosis (based on 
noninvasive tests), a GLP-1 RA is pre­
ferred for glycemic management due 
to beneficial effects on MASH. A Pio­
glitazone or a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA 
B can be considered for glycemic man­
agement due to potential beneficial ef­
fects on MASH. B
9.13b Combination therapy with pio­
glitazone plus a GLP-1 RA can be 
considered for the treatment of hyper­
glycemia in adults with type 2 diabetes 
with biopsy-proven MASH or those at 
high risk of liver fibrosis (identified 
with noninvasive tests) due to poten­
tial beneficial effects on MASH. B
9.14 Medication plan and medication- 
taking behavior should be reeval­
uated at regular intervals (e.g., every 
3–6 months) and adjusted as needed 
to incorporate specific factors that af­
fect choice of treatment and ensure 
achievement of individualized glyce­
mic goals (Fig. 4.1 and Table 9.2). E
9.15 Treatment modification (including 
intensification or deintensification) for 
adults not meeting individualized treat­
ment goals should not be delayed. A
9.16 Choice of glucose-lowering 
therapy modification should take into 
consideration individualized glycemic 
and weight goals, presence of comor­
bidities (cardiovascular, kidney, liver, and 
other metabolic comorbidities), and the 
risk of hypoglycemia. A
9.17 When initiating a new glucose- 
lowering medication, reassess the 
need for and/or dose of medications 
with higher hypoglycemia risk (i.e., sul­
fonylureas, meglitinides, and insulin) to 
minimize the risk of hypoglycemia and 
treatment burden. A
9.18 Concurrent use of dipeptidyl pep­
tidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors with a GLP-1 
RA or a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA is not 
recommended due to lack of additional 
glucose lowering beyond that of a 
GLP-1–based therapy. B
9.19 In adults with type 2 diabetes 
who have not achieved their individu­
alized weight goals, additional weight 
management interventions (e.g., in­
tensification of lifestyle modifications, 
structured weight management pro­
grams, pharmacologic agents, or met­
abolic surgery, as appropriate) are 
recommended. A
9.20 In adults with type 2 diabetes, ini­
tiation of insulin should be considered 
regardless of background glucose- 
lowering therapy or disease duration 
if symptoms of hyperglycemia are pre­
sent or when A1C or blood glucose 
levels are very high (i.e., A1C >10% 
[>86 mmol/mol] or blood glucose 
≥300 mg/dL [≥16.7 mmol/L]). E
9.21 In adults with type 2 diabetes 
without severe hyperglycemia or hy­
perglycemic crisis, GLP-1–based ther­
apy is preferred to insulin for initial 
or add-on glucose-lowering therapy 
(Fig. 9.4). A
9.22 If insulin is used, combination 
therapy with a GLP-1 RA, including a 
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, is recom­
mended for greater glycemic effec­
tiveness as well as beneficial effects 
on weight and hypoglycemia risk for 
adults with type 2 diabetes. Insulin 
dosing should be reassessed upon 
addition or dose escalation of a GLP-1 
RA or dual GIP and GLP-1 RA. A
9.23 In adults with type 2 diabetes 
who are initiating insulin therapy, con­
tinue glucose-lowering agents (unless 
contraindicated or not tolerated) for 
ongoing glycemic and metabolic bene­
fits (i.e., weight, cardiometabolic, or 
kidney benefits). A
Choice of Glucose-Lowering Therapy
Healthy lifestyle behaviors, diabetes 
self-management education and support 
(DSMES), avoidance of therapeutic inertia, 
and social determinants of health should 
be considered in the glucose-lowering 
management of type 2 diabetes. Pharma­
cologic therapy should be guided by person- 
centered treatment factors, including 
comorbidities, considerations of ad­
verse effects (including hypoglycemia), 
treatment burden, and treatment goals 
and preferences. Shared decision-making 
can be facilitated during clinical encounters 
through use of decision aides and has been 
shown to improve A1C in adults with type 
2 diabetes, though in clinical trials the ben­
efits of shared decision-making were lim­
ited to face-to-face discussions (not online 
encounters) and to individuals with ele­
vated A1C (>8%) (89). Pharmacotherapy 
should be started at the time type 2 dia­
betes is diagnosed, without delay, unless 
there are contraindications. Medication 
plans should have adequate efficacy to 
achieve and maintain individualized treat­
ment goals with respect to glucose low­
ering, reduction of cardiovascular and 
kidney disease risks, weight manage­
ment, and effects on other health condi­
tions and treatment burden. In adults 
with type 2 diabetes and established or 
high risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease (ASCVD), HF, and/or CKD, the 
S192 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 9.2—Features of medications for lowering glucose in type 2 diabetes
Medication 
(route of 
administration)
Glucose-lowering 
efficacy1
Hypoglycemia 
risk
Weight effects2
CV effects
Kidney effects
MASH effects
Clinical considerations and adverse 
effects
Effect on MACE
Effect on HF
Progression of 
CKD
Dosing/use considerations*
Metformin (oral) High
No
Neutral (potential 
for modest loss)
Potential benefit
Neutral
Neutral
• Contraindicated with 
eGFR <30 mL/min/ 
1.73 m2 
Neutral
• GI side effects: mitigate 
with slow dose titration,  
extended-release formula­
tions, and administration 
with food 
• Potential for vitamin B12  
deficiency: monitor and  
replete as appropriate 
SGLT2 inhibitors 
(oral)
Intermediate to 
high
No
Loss (intermediate)
Benefit: 
canagliflozin, 
empagliflozin
Benefit: 
canagliflozin, 
dapagliflozin, 
empagliflozin, 
ertugliflozin
Benefit: 
canagliflozin, 
empagliflozin, 
dapagliflozin
• See labels of individ­
ual agents for dosage 
considerations for  
kidney function 
• Glucose-lowering  
effect is minimal at 
eGFR <45 mL/min/ 
1.73 m2 and lower; 
continue or start for 
cardiovascular and 
kidney benefit if eGFR 
>20 mL/min/1.73 m2. 
May continue until  
dialysis or transplantation 
Unknown
• DKA risk in individuals with 
insulin deficiency (rare in 
T2D): discontinue, evaluate, 
and treat promptly if sus­
pected; be aware of predis­
posing risk factors and clini­
cal presentations (including  
euglycemic DKA); mitigate 
risk with sick-day planning; 
discontinue before sched­
uled surgery (e.g., 3–4 
days), during critical illness, 
or during prolonged fasting 
• Genital mycotic infections: 
mitigate risk with genital  
hygiene and avoid use in 
high-risk individuals 
• Urosepsis and pyelonephri­
tis: evaluate individuals for 
signs and symptoms of  
urinary tract infections and 
treat promptly 
• Necrotizing fasciitis in the  
perineum (Fournier gangrene): 
rare; prompt treatment if 
suspected 
• Intravascular volume deple­
tion: attention to volume 
status and blood pressure, 
particularly when ill or fast­
ing; adjust other volume- 
contracting agents as appli­
cable; monitor kidney func­
tion upon initiation 
Continued on p. S194
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S193 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 9.2—Continued
Medication 
(route of 
administration)
Glucose-lowering 
efficacy1
Hypoglycemia 
risk
Weight effects2
CV effects
Kidney effects
MASH effects
Clinical considerations and adverse 
effects
Effect on MACE
Effect on HF
Progression of 
CKD
Dosing/use considerations*
GLP-1 RAs (SQ; 
semaglutide 
also available 
in oral 
formulation)
High to very high
No
Loss (intermediate 
to very high)
Benefit: 
dulaglutide, 
liraglutide, 
semaglutide (SQ 
and oral)
Benefit: 
semaglutide 
(SQ)
Benefit for 
kidney end 
points in 
CVOTs, driven 
by 
albuminuria 
outcomes: 
dulaglutide, 
liraglutide, 
semaglutide 
(SQ)
• See labels of individ­
ual agents for dosage 
considerations for  
kidney function 
• No dose adjustment 
for dulaglutide,  
liraglutide, or 
semaglutide 
• Monitor kidney  
function when initiat­
ing or escalating 
doses in individuals 
with kidney impair­
ment reporting severe 
adverse GI reactions 
Benefit: 
semaglutide 
(SQ)
• Thyroid C-cell tumors identi­
fied in rodents; human rele­
vance not determined 
• Provide guidance on discon­
tinuation prior to surgical 
procedures to mitigate  
potential for pulmonary  
aspiration with general  
anesthesia or deep sedation 
• Pancreatitis: acute pancrea­
titis has been reported, but 
causality has not been  
established; do not initiate if 
at high risk for pancreatitis, 
and discontinue if pancreati­
tis is suspected 
• Biliary disease: evaluate for 
gallbladder disease if chole­
lithiasis or cholecystitis is 
suspected; avoid use in at-risk 
individuals 
• Ileus: reported, but risk 
level is not well established 
• Diabetic retinopathy: close 
monitoring of retinopathy in 
those at high risk (older  
individuals and those with 
longer duration of T2D  
[≥10 years]) 
• Nonarteritic anterior ische­
mic optic neuropathy 
(NAION) reported (rare inci­
dence); monitor for NAION 
during eye examinations 
• Impact on drug absorption: 
orally administered drug ab­
sorption may be impaired 
during dose titration (includ­
ing oral contraceptives) 
• GI side effects: counsel on 
potential for GI side effects; 
provide guidance on dietary 
modifications to mitigate GI 
side effects (reduction in 
meal size, mindful eating 
practices [e.g., stop eating 
Neutral: exenatide 
once weekly, 
lixisenatide
Demonstrated 
benefit for 
progression of 
CKD for 
semaglutide 
(SQ)
Dual GIP and 
GLP-1 RA (SQ)
Very high
No
Loss (very high)
Under investigation Benefit: 
tirzepatide
Potential benefit
• See labels of individ­
ual agents for dosage 
considerations for  
kidney function 
• No dose adjustment 
• Monitor kidney function 
when initiating or esca­
lating doses in individu­
als with kidney impair­
ment reporting severe 
adverse GI reactions 
Potential benefit
Continued on p. S195
S194 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 9.2—Continued
Medication 
(route of 
administration)
Glucose-lowering 
efficacy1
Hypoglycemia 
risk
Weight effects2
CV effects
Kidney effects
MASH effects
Clinical considerations and adverse 
effects
Effect on MACE
Effect on HF
Progression of 
CKD
Dosing/use considerations*
once full], decreasing intake 
of high-fat or spicy food); 
consider slower dose titra­
tion for those experiencing 
GI challenges; not recom­
mended for individuals with 
gastroparesis 
DPP-4 inhibitors 
(oral)
Intermediate
No
Neutral
Neutral
Neutral 
(potential risk: 
saxagliptin)
Neutral
• Dose adjustment  
required based on 
kidney function  
(sitagliptin, saxagliptin, 
alogliptin) 
• No dose adjustment 
required for 
linagliptin 
Unknown
• Pancreatitis has been reported 
but causality has not been 
established; discontinue if 
pancreatitis is suspected 
• Postmarketing concerns 
about joint pain (consider 
discontinuing if debilitating 
and other treatment options 
are feasible) and bullous 
pemphigoid (discontinue if 
suspected) reversible upon 
discontinuation 
Pioglitazone 
(oral)
High
No
Gain
Potential benefit
Increased risk
Neutral
• No dose adjustment 
required 
• Generally not recom­
mended in kidney 
impairment due to 
potential for fluid 
retention 
Potential benefit
• Increased risk of HF and 
fluid retention; do not use 
in setting of HF 
• Risk of bone fractures 
• Bladder cancer: do not use 
in individuals with active 
bladder cancer, and use  
caution in those with prior 
history of bladder cancer; 
association observed with 
higher cumulative exposure 
(e.g., longer duration, higher 
doses) 
Sulfonylureas 
(2nd 
generation) 
(oral)
High
Yes
Gain
Neutral
Neutral
Neutral
• Glyburide: generally 
not recommended in 
CKD 
• Glipizide and glimepiride: 
initiate conservatively to 
avoid hypoglycemia 
Unknown
• FDA Special Warning on in­
creased risk of CV mortality 
based on studies of an older 
sulfonylurea (tolbutamide); 
glimepiride shown to be CV 
safe (see text) 
• Use with caution in individ­
uals at risk for hypoglyce­
mia, particularly if in combi­
nation with insulin 
Continued on p. S196
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S195 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Table 9.2—Continued
Medication 
(route of 
administration)
Glucose-lowering 
efficacy1
Hypoglycemia 
risk
Weight effects2
CV effects
Kidney effects
MASH effects
Clinical considerations and adverse 
effects
Effect on MACE
Effect on HF
Progression of 
CKD
Dosing/use considerations*
Insulin (human) 
(SQ; regular 
insulin also 
available as 
inhaled 
formulation)
High to very high
Yes
Gain
Neutral
Neutral
Neutral
• Lower insulin doses 
required with a  
decrease in eGFR;  
titrate per clinical 
response 
Unknown
• Injection site reactions 
• Higher risk of hypoglycemia 
with human insulin (NPH or 
premixed formulations) vs. 
analogs 
• Risk of hypoglycemia and 
duration of activity  
increases with severity of 
impaired kidney function 
• Refer to device-specific  
instructions for insulins 
compatible with different 
delivery systems (i.e., 
pumps, connected insulin 
pens, insulin patches) 
Insulin (analogs) 
(SQ)
CKD, chronic kidney disease; CV, cardiovascular; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; DPP-4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration; GI, gastro­
intestinal; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; HF, heart failure; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; MASH, metabolic dys­
function-associated steatohepatitis; SGLT2, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2; SQ, subcutaneous; T2D, type 2 diabetes. *For agent-specific dosing recommendations, please refer to manufacturers’ 
prescribing information. 1Tsapas et al. (107). 2Tsapas et al. (317). Adapted from Davies et al. (90).
treatment plan should include agents 
that reduce cardiovascular and kidney 
disease risk (Fig. 9.4 and Table 9.2) 
(see also section 10, “Cardiovascular 
Disease and Risk Management,” and 
section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and 
Risk Management”).
In individuals without ASCVD, HF, or 
CKD, choice of therapy should be in­
formed by considerations of weight man­
agement (see section 8, “Obesity and 
Weight Management for the Prevention 
and Treatment of Diabetes”), mitigation 
of metabolic dysfunction–associated stea­
totic liver disease (MASLD) or metabolic 
dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis 
(MASH) risk (see section 4, “Comprehensive 
Medical Evaluation and Assessment of 
Comorbidities”), and achievement and 
maintenance of individualized glycemic 
goals. In general, higher-efficacy approaches, 
including combination therapy, have greater 
likelihood of achieving treatment goals. 
Weight management is a distinct treat­
ment goal, along with glycemic manage­
ment, as it has multifaceted benefits, 
including reduction of A1C, reduction in 
hepatic steatosis, and improvement in 
cardiovascular risk factors (90–92). For 
individuals with type 2 diabetes who re­
quire initiation or intensification of glucose- 
lowering therapy to achieve and/or 
maintain individualized glycemic goals 
and who do not have additional consid­
erations informing choice of therapy 
beyond need for glucose lowering, 
metformin is a commonly used medi­
cation that historically has been the 
first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes 
(93,94). Metformin is effective and safe, 
is inexpensive and widely available, and 
reduces risks of microvascular complica­
tions, cardiovascular events, and death 
(93,95,96). Metformin is available in an 
immediate-release form for twice-daily 
dosing or as an extended-release form 
that can be given once daily. Compared 
with sulfonylureas, metformin as first-line 
therapy has beneficial effects on A1C, is 
weight neutral, does not cause hypoglyce­
mia, and reduces cardiovascular mortality 
(97). Metformin is also more effective than 
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors in 
lowering A1C and weight when used as 
monotherapy (98).
The principal side effects of metformin 
are gastrointestinal intolerance due to 
bloating, abdominal discomfort, and diar­
rhea; these can be mitigated by gradual 
dose titration and/or using extended- 
S196 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
release formulation. The drug is cleared 
by kidney filtration, and metformin may 
be safely used in people with estimated 
glomerular filtration rate ≥30 mL/min/ 
1.73 m2 (99). Very high circulating levels 
(e.g., as a result of overdose or acute kid­
ney injury) have been associated with lac­
tic acidosis (100). However, the occurrence 
of this complication is very rare (101) and 
primarily occurs when the estimated glo­
merular filtration rate (eGFR) is <30 mL/ 
min/1.73 m2 (102). For people with an 
eGFR of 30–45 mL/min/1.73 m2, there is 
an increased risk for periodic decreases of 
eGFR to ≤30 mL/min/1.73 m2 which 
heightens the risk of lactic acidosis. Met­
formin use is also associated with in­
creased risk of vitamin B12 deficiency and 
worsening of symptoms of neuropathy 
(103,104), suggesting periodic testing of vi­
tamin B12 levels (see section 3, “Prevention 
or Delay of Diabetes and Associated 
Comorbidities”).
The comparative glucose-lowering effi­
cacy of different pharmacologic agents 
has been examined primarily in network 
meta-analyses, as few prospective clinical 
trials have compared multiple drug clas­
ses head-to-head. In general, the largest 
reductions in A1C levels are achieved by 
treatment plans that include insulin, se­
lect GLP-1 RAs (particularly semaglutide), 
and tirzepatide, while DPP-4 inhibitors re­
sulted in the smallest reductions in A1C 
(105–107). The Glycemia Reduction Ap­
proaches in Type 2 Diabetes: A Compara­
tive Effectiveness (GRADE) trial compared 
use of insulin glargine U-100, liraglutide, si­
tagliptin, and glimepiride as add-on treat­
ments to metformin monotherapy among 
individuals with type 2 diabetes and base­
line A1C 6.8–8.5% (108). It found that at 
5 years, all therapies decreased A1C levels 
but glargine and liraglutide were modestly 
more effective in achieving and maintain­
ing A1C below 7%, while sitagliptin was 
least effective. Severe hypoglycemia was 
significantly more common in those pre­
scribed glargine or glimepiride. An obser­
vational study that emulated many of 
GRADE’s design features and included can­
agliflozin as a comparator arm, but did not 
include insulin glargine, found that liraglu­
tide was more effective at achieving and 
maintaining A1C below 7% than sitagliptin, 
canagliflozin, or glimepiride, which all had 
comparable effectiveness (108).
Thus, when choosing a glucose-lowering 
medication to achieve individualized gly­
cemic goals, we recommend engaging in 
shared decision-making and considering 
factors such as glucose-lowering efficacy, 
the side effect profile, and medication ac­
cessibility and affordability (108). In all cases, 
treatment plans need to be continuously re­
viewed for efficacy, side effects, hypoglyce­
mia, and treatment burden (Table 9.2).
When A1C is ≥1.5% above the indi­
vidualized glycemic goal (see section 6, 
“Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and 
Hyperglycemic Crises,” for appropriate 
goals), many individuals will require dual- 
combination therapy or a more potent 
glucose-lowering agent to achieve and 
maintain their goal A1C level (90) (Fig. 9.4
and Table 9.2). Insulin should be consid­
ered as part of any combination medica­
tion plan when hyperglycemia is severe, 
especially if catabolic features (weight loss, 
hypertriglyceridemia, and ketosis) are pre­
sent. It is common practice to initiate insu­
lin therapy for people who present with 
blood glucose levels ≥300 mg/dL (≥16.7 
mmol/L) or A1C >10% (>86 mmol/mol) 
or if the individual has symptoms of hyper­
glycemia (i.e., polyuria or polydipsia) or ev­
idence of catabolism (unexpected weight 
loss) (Fig. 9.5). As glucose toxicity resolves, 
simplifying the medication plan and/or 
changing to noninsulin agents is possible. 
Additionally, there is evidence that people 
with type 2 diabetes and severe hypergly­
cemia can also be effectively treated with 
a sulfonylurea, a GLP-1 RA, or a dual GIP 
and GLP-1 RA, though evidence is scarce 
for individuals with baseline A1C above 
10–12% (105,109–111). GLP-1 RAs and tir­
zepatide have additional benefits over in­
sulin and sulfonylureas, specifically lower 
risks for hypoglycemia (both) and favor­
able weight (both), cardiovascular (GLP-1 
RAs), kidney (GLP-1 RAs), and liver (both) 
end points.
Combination Therapy
Because type 2 diabetes is a progressive 
disease, maintenance of glycemic goals 
often requires combination therapy. Tra­
ditional recommendations have called for 
the use of stepwise addition of medica­
tions to metformin to maintain A1C goals. 
The advantage of this is to provide a clear 
assessment of the positive and negative 
effects of new drugs and reduce potential 
side effects and expense (112). However, 
some data support initial combination 
therapy for more rapid attainment of glyce­
mic goals (113,114) and later combination 
therapy for longer durability of glycemic 
effect (115). Initial combination therapy 
should be considered in people present­
ing with A1C levels 1.5–2.0% above their 
individualized goal or in those at high risk 
for cardiovascular disease (CVD) or 
with established CVD irrespective of 
A1C levels (GLP-1 RA and SGLT2 inhibi­
tor combination therapy) (see section 
10, “Cardiovascular Disease and Risk 
Management”). The incorporation of 
high-glycemic-efficacy therapies or thera­
pies for cardiovascular and kidney disease 
risk reduction (e.g., GLP-1 RAs, a dual GIP 
and GLP-1 RA, and SGLT2 inhibitors) may 
reduce the need for agents that increase 
the risks of hypoglycemia and weight gain 
or are less well tolerated. Thus, treatment 
intensification requires purposeful se­
lection of medications in alignment with 
multiple individualized person-centered 
treatment goals simultaneously (Fig. 9.4).
Treatment intensification, deintensifi­
cation, or modification, as appropriate, 
for people not meeting individualized 
treatment goals should not be delayed 
(therapeutic inertia) (116). Results from 
comparative effectiveness meta-analyses 
suggest that each new class of oral nonin­
sulin agents when added to metformin 
generally lowers A1C by approximately 
0.7–1.0% (8–11 mmol/mol). Addition of 
GLP-1 RAs or the dual GIP and GLP-1 RA 
to metformin usually results in 1% to ≥2% 
lowering of A1C (105,117,118) (Fig. 9.4
and Table 9.2). Use of GLP-1 RAs (or the 
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA) together with a 
DPP-4 inhibitor is not recommended, as 
there is no added glucose-lowering ben­
efit beyond that of the GLP-1 RA alone 
(119–121).
When even greater potency of glucose 
reduction is needed, basal insulin, either 
human NPH or a long-acting insulin ana­
log, should be initiated. However, if the 
individual is not already receiving GLP-1 
RA or dual GIP and GLP-1 RA therapy, an 
agent from these classes should be started 
first, as it may be sufficient for achieving 
individualized A1C goals but with lower 
risk of hypoglycemia and with favorable 
weight, cardiovascular, kidney, and liver 
profiles. While most GLP-1 RAs are inject­
able medications, an oral formulation 
of semaglutide is commercially available 
(122). In trials analyzing the addition of 
an injectable GLP-1 RA, dual GIP and 
GLP-1 RA, or insulin in people needing 
further glucose lowering, glycemic effica­
cies of GLP-1 RAs and the dual GIP and 
GLP-1 RA were similar to or greater than 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S197 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
INITIATION Initiate appropriate starting dose for agent selected (varies within class)
TITRATION Titrate to maintenance dose (varies within class)
appropriate, or if insulin is preferred
If on bedtime NPH, consider converting 
to twice-daily NPH plan
Conversion based on individual needs and 
current glycemic management. The following is 
one possible approach:
INITIATION
• 
• 2/3 given in the morning
•
1/3 given at bedtime
TITRATION 
•
Titrate based on individualized needs
Considerations for adding basal insulin3
Choice of basal insulin should be based on person-specific considerations, including cost. Refer to 
Table 9.4 for insulin cost information. Consider prescription of glucagon for emergent hypoglycemia. 
If not on CGM, consider adding CGM.
Stepwise doses of prandial insulin 
(i.e., two, then three 
additional injections) 
Proceed to full basal-bolus plan 
(i.e., basal insulin and prandial 
insulin with each meal) 
Consider self-mixed/split insulin plan 
Can adjust NPH and short/rapid-acting insulins separately 
INITIATION
• 
• 2/3 given before breakfast
•
1/3 given before dinner
•
Add 4 units of short/rapid-acting insulin to each injection or 10% of 
reduced NPH dose
TITRATION 
•
Titrate each component of the plan based on individualized needs
Consider twice-daily premixed insulin plan
INITIATION
•
Usually unit per unit at the same total
insulin dose, but may require adjustment to 
individual needs
TITRATION 
•
Titrate based on individualized needs
Initiation and titration of basal analog or bedtime NPH insulin4
INITIATION
Start 10 units 
per day or 
kg per day
TITRATION
• Set FPG goal (see section 6, "Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises") 
•
Choose evidence-based titration algorithm, e.g., increase 2 units every 3 days to
reach fasting plasma glucose goal without hypoglycemia
• 
Initiation and titration of prandial insulin5,6
Usually one dose with the largest meal or meal with greatest PPG excursion; 
prandial insulin can be dosed individually or mixed with NPH as appropriate
INITIATION 
•
4 units per day or 10% of basal insulin dose
• 
lowering the basal dose by 4 units per day 
or 10% of basal dose
TITRATION
• 
• For hypoglycemia: determine cause; if no clear 
Assess adequacy of insulin dose at every visit
Consider clinical signals to evaluate for overbasalization and need to consider adjunctive 
therapies (e.g., elevated bedtime-to-morning and/or postprandial-to-preprandial 
differential, hypoglycemia [aware or unaware], high glucose variability)
If glycemia is above goal
If glycemia is above goal
If glycemia is above goal
• 
consider these classes in combination and with insulin (may use fixed-ratio product, if available 
and appropriate)3
• If glycemia remains above goal:
Use principles in Figure 9.3, including reinforcement of behavioral interventions (weight management 
and physical activity) and provision of DSMES, to meet individualized treatment goals
To avoid 
therapeutic 
inertia, reassess 
and modify 
treatment 
regularly 
1. 
2.
3. 
4. Consider switching from evening NPH to a basal analog if the individual develops hypoglycemia and/or frequently forgets to administer NPH in the evening and would 
be better managed with a morning dose of a long-acting basal Insulin. Consider dosing NPH in the morning for steroid-induced hyperglycemia.
5. Prandial insulin options include injectable rapid- and ultra-rapid-acting analog insulins, injectable short-acting human insulin, or inhaled human insulin.
6. If adding prandial insulin to NPH, consider initiation of a self-mixed or premixed insulin plan to decrease the number of injections required.
If injectable therapy is needed to attain glycemic goals1
Consider GLP-1 RA or dual GIP and GLP-1 RA in most individuals prior to insulin2
If already on GLP-1 RA or dual GIP 
and GLP-1 RA, or if these are not 
0.1–0.2 units/
For hypoglycemia: determine cause; if no clear reason, lower dose by 10–20%
If A1C <8% (<64 mmol/mol), consider
Increase dose by 1–2 units insulin dose or
10–15% twice weekly
reason, lower corresponding dose by 10–20%
Total dose = 80% of current bedtime NPH dose
Total NPH dose = 80% of current NPH dose at the same total
Consider insulin as the first injectable if symptoms of hyperglycemia are present, when A1C or blood glucose levels are very high (i.e., A1C >10% [>86 mmol/mol] or
blood glucose ≥300 mg/dL [≥16.7 mmol/L]), or when a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes is a possibility.
When selecting GLP-1 RAs, consider individual preference, glycemic lowering, weight-lowering effect, and frequency of injection. If CVD is present, consider GLP-1 RA
with proven CVD benefit; oral or injectable GLP-1 RAs are appropriate.
For people on GLP-1 RA and basal insulin combination, consider use of a fixed-ratio combination product (IDegLira or iGlarLixi).
Figure 9.5—Intensifying to injectable therapies in type 2 diabetes. CGM, continuous glucose monitoring; DSMES, diabetes self-management educa­
tion and support; FPG, fasting plasma glucose; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypep­
tide; PPG, postprandial glucose. Adapted from Davies et al. (318). 
S198 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
that of basal insulin (123–130). GLP-1 
RAs and dual GIP and GLP-1 RA in these 
trials also had a lower risk of hypoglyce­
mia and beneficial effects on body weight 
compared with insulin, albeit with greater 
gastrointestinal side effects. Thus, trial re­
sults support high-potency GLP-1 RAs and 
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA as the preferred 
options for individuals requiring more in­
tensive glucose management (Fig. 9.5).
In individuals who are intensified to in­
sulin therapy, combination therapy with a 
GLP-1 RA or a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA has 
been shown to have greater efficacy and 
durability of glycemic treatment effects, 
as well as weight and hypoglycemia bene­
fits, than treatment intensification with 
insulin alone (90,131). However, cost, ac­
cessibility, and tolerability are important 
considerations for GLP-1 RA and dual GIP 
and GLP-1 RA use.
In all cases, treatment plans need to be 
continuously reviewed for efficacy, side 
effects (including hypoglycemia), and treat­
ment burden (Table 9.2). In some instan­
ces, the individual will require medication 
reduction or discontinuation. Common rea­
sons for this include ineffectiveness, hypo­
glycemia, intolerable side effects, new 
contraindications, expense, or a change 
in glycemic goals (e.g., in response to de­
velopment of comorbidities). See below 
for cost considerations of glucose-lowering 
therapies (MEDICATION COSTS AND AFFORDABILITY). 
Section 13, “Older Adults,” has a full dis­
cussion of treatment considerations in 
older adults. Treatment deintensification 
may also be needed in the setting of 
weight loss and/or optimization of life­
style behaviors, when fewer pharmaco­
logic agents are needed to maintain A1C 
goals. In this case, we recommend prefer­
ential deescalation of therapies that are 
most likely to cause side effects, hypogly­
cemia, and/or treatment burden and do 
not have cardiovascular, kidney, or meta­
bolic benefits for continued use.
Glucose-Lowering Therapy for 
People With Cardiovascular Disease 
or Risk Factors for Cardiovascular 
Disease
For people with type 2 diabetes and es­
tablished ASCVD or indicators of high 
ASCVD risk, HF, or CKD, an SGLT2 inhibi­
tor and/or GLP-1 RA with demonstrated 
cardiovascular benefit (Table 9.2) is rec­
ommended independent of A1C, with or 
without metformin use, and in consider­
ation of person-specific factors (Fig. 9.4). 
GLP-1 RAs or a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA 
with demonstrated benefits are recom­
mended for people with type 2 diabetes, 
obesity, and symptomatic HF with preserved 
ejection fraction (132–135) (Table 9.2 and 
Fig. 9.4). Individuals with these comorbid­
ities already achieving their individualized 
glycemic goals with other medications 
may benefit from switching to these pre­
ferred medications to reduce risk of ASCVD, 
HF, and/or CKD in addition to achieving gly­
cemic goals (see section 10, “Cardiovascular 
Disease and Risk Management,” and sec­
tion 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk 
Management”). This is particularly impor­
tant because SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 
RAs are associated with lower risk of hypo­
glycemia and individuals with ASCVD, HF, 
and CKD have higher hypoglycemia risk than 
individuals without these conditions (136).
Individuals at lower risk for ASCVD 
may still benefit from GLP-1 RA therapy 
to reduce their risk of future cardiovas­
cular events. The GRADE trial, which was 
designed to examine the comparative ef­
fectiveness of insulin glargine U-100, gli­
mepiride, liraglutide, and sitagliptin in 
individuals with relatively short duration 
of diabetes (and without established CVD) 
with respect to achieving and maintaining 
A1C below 7%, found that individuals 
treated with liraglutide had a lower risk of 
cardiovascular events than individuals re­
ceiving the other three treatments (hazard 
ratio 0.7 [95% CI 0.6–0.9]), although no 
significant differences were found between 
individual treatment groups for major ad­
verse cardiovascular events, hospitalization 
for HF, or cardiovascular death (137). Indi­
viduals with type 2 diabetes and moderate 
levels of CVD risk appear to derive car­
diovascular and mortality benefits with 
preferential use of GLP-1 RA and SGLT2 
inhibitors compared with sulfonylurea 
or DPP-4 inhibitors (138). Similarly, while 
greater reductions in HF hospitalization 
risk are observed with SGLT2 inhibitor 
therapy in individuals with higher baseline 
HF risk, some benefit is observed across 
the full range of HF risk (139).
Glucose-Lowering Therapy for 
People With Chronic Kidney Disease
For individuals with type 2 diabetes and 
CKD, considerations for selection of glucose- 
lowering medications include their effec­
tiveness and safety when eGFR is reduced 
as well as the potential to affect CKD 
progression, CVD risk, and hypoglycemia 
(140). Preferred medications for glucose 
management in individuals with CKD are 
GLP-1 RAs and SGLT2 inhibitors (can be 
initiated if eGFR is above 20 mL/min/ 
1.73 m2). GLP-1 RAs are effective in lower­
ing glucose levels, regardless of kidney 
function, with a low risk for hypoglycemia, 
and a recent clinical trial suggests that the 
GLP-1 RA semaglutide has a beneficial ef­
fect on CVD, mortality, and kidney out­
comes among people with CKD, leading 
to the recommendation that semaglutide 
can be used as another first-line agent for 
people with CKD (141,142). Other GLP-1 
RAs (liraglutide and dulaglutide) may also 
have CKD benefits, but no other dedicated 
kidney trials have been published. Similarly, 
no dedicated kidney outcomes studies for 
the dual GIP and GLP-1 RA (tirzepatide) have 
been published, although post hoc analyses 
of clinical trials in people with type 2 diabetes 
have shown that tirzepatide slowed the rate 
of eGFR decline and reduced albuminuria 
(143,144). The GLP-1 RAs lixisenatide and 
exenatide, which require the kidneys for 
elimination, should be avoided in individ­
uals with eGFR ≤30 mL/min/1.73 m2 or 
with creatinine clearance ≤30 mL/min, 
respectively (145–147).
Dedicated kidney outcomes trials in 
people with CKD and type 2 diabetes 
have shown that the SGLT2 inhibitors 
empagliflozin, canagliflozin, and dapagli­
flozin have beneficial effects on slowing 
progression of CKD and CV outcomes 
in this population (148–150). However, 
their ability to lower glucose levels de­
clines when the eGFR falls below 45 mL/ 
min/1.73 m2 (151–153). Metformin is also 
a therapeutic agent for those with CKD 
due to its well-documented efficacy and 
safety profile for people with type 2 dia­
betes. However, there is no documented 
direct kidney benefit. Importantly, met­
formin should not be started in those 
whose eGFR is <45 mL/min/1.73 m2. For 
those already treated with metformin, the 
dose of metformin should be reduced 
once eGFR is <45 mL/min/1.73 m2 and 
should be stopped once eGFR is <30 
mL/min/1.73 m2 (99). A secondary anal­
ysis of the GRADE trial found that insulin 
glargine, liraglutide, sitagliptin, and glime­
piride did not prevent the development 
of CKD when added to metformin mono­
therapy in individuals without underlying 
CKD (154).
Individuals with CKD, particularly ad­
vanced CKD and kidney failure, are at high 
risk for hypoglycemia (136). If treated with 
insulin and/or sulfonylureas, treatment needs 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S199 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
to be closely monitored and adjusted as 
eGFR declines and individuals need to be 
educated about and closely monitored 
for hypoglycemia occurrence (140). See 
section 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and 
Risk Management,” for more details about 
prevention and treatment of CKD in individ­
uals with diabetes.
Glucose-Lowering Therapy for 
People With Metabolic Comorbidities
Many adults with diabetes, either type 2 
diabetes or type 1 diabetes, with obesity 
are at high risk of developing MASLD or 
MASH as well as MASH cirrhosis. Hence, 
the presence of MASLD or MASH should 
be a consideration when choosing glucose- 
lowering therapies. Accruing randomized 
clinical trial data suggest that pioglitazone, 
GLP-1 RAs, and a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA 
have favorable outcomes in terms of de­
creasing hepatic steatosis and in the resolu­
tion of MASH without worsening of fibrosis 
in individuals with biopsy-proven MASH or 
those at higher risk of clinically significant 
liver fibrosis identified with noninvasive 
tests (155–160). Combination therapy with 
pioglitazone plus GLP-1 RA should also be 
considered for treatment of hyperglycemia 
in adults with type 2 diabetes with biopsy- 
proven MASH or those at higher risk of 
clinically significant liver fibrosis identified 
with noninvasive tests, as such therapy is 
safe and effective and has been shown to 
reduce hepatic steatosis (161–163). It is im­
portant to note that these studies are 
based on phase 2 clinical trials and that 
only semaglutide has recently shown bene­
fit in a phase 3 clinical trial with histological 
outcomes in MASH, including improve­
ments in steatohepatitis and fibrosis (156); 
this subsequently led to its approval by the 
FDA for the treatment of MASH with mod­
erate to advanced liver fibrosis, while the 
other therapies await further phase 3 
confirmation of evidence. However, these 
plans are preferred as they offer potential 
benefit compared with lack of histological 
benefit (or clinical trial data) from other 
glucose-lowering therapies in MASLD. Fur­
ther details regarding liver health in diabetes 
can be found in section 4, “Comprehensive 
Medical Evaluation and Assessment of 
Comorbidities.”
Obesity is present in over 90% of peo­
ple with type 2 diabetes, and in these in­
dividuals weight management is a key 
treatment goal, along with glucose lower­
ing. In the setting of obesity, the choice of 
glucose-lowering medications should take 
into consideration their effects on weight. 
Insulins, sulfonylureas, and thiazolidine­
diones can promote weight gain and 
should be used judiciously and at the 
lowest possible dose. Glucose-lowering 
medications that promote weight loss 
should be prioritized. Of the currently 
available agents, tirzepatide and semaglu­
tide have the highest efficacy in terms of 
glucose lowering as well as weight loss, 
followed by dulaglutide, liraglutide, and 
extended-release exenatide (164–168). 
Other glucose-lowering medications (met­
formin, SGLT2 inhibitors, DPP-4 inhibitors, 
dopamine agonists, bile acid sequestrants, 
and α-glucosidase inhibitors) are weight 
neutral or have a modest beneficial effect 
on weight. These medications can be used 
as add-on therapies in people with type 2 
diabetes and obesity who require addi­
tional glucose lowering or if the more ef­
fective medications are not tolerated, are 
contraindicated, or are unavailable. Meta­
bolic surgery, especially Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass and sleeve gastrectomy, are very 
effective interventions to achieve both 
weight and glycemic goals and have ad­
ditional health benefits beyond improv­
ing metabolism (169). Further details 
regarding treatment of obesity can be 
found in section 8, “Obesity and Weight 
Management for the Prevention and 
Treatment of Diabetes.”
Insulin Therapy
Many adults with type 2 diabetes eventu­
ally require and benefit from insulin ther­
apy (Fig. 9.5). See INSULIN ADMINISTRATION 
TECHNIQUE, above, for guidance on how to 
administer insulin safely and effectively. 
The progressive nature of type 2 diabetes 
should be regularly and objectively ex­
plained to individuals with diabetes, and 
clinicians should avoid using insulin as a 
threat or describing it as a sign of per­
sonal failure. The utility and importance 
of insulin to achieve and maintain glyce­
mic goals once progression of the disease 
overcomes the effect of other agents as 
well as for temporary use for acute situa­
tions (such as hospitalization, acute ill­
ness, or high-dose glucocorticoid therapy) 
should be emphasized. Educating and in­
volving people with diabetes in insulin 
management is beneficial. For example, 
instruction of individuals with type 2 dia­
betes initiating insulin on self-titration of 
insulin doses based on glucose monitoring 
improves glycemic management (170). 
Comprehensive education regarding 
glucose monitoring, nutrition, physical 
activity, contingency planning (for ill­
ness, fasting, or medication unavailabil­
ity), and the prevention and appropriate 
treatment of hypoglycemia are critically 
important for all individuals using insulin. 
Assessment and education tailored to im­
prove health literacy and numeracy may 
be necessary for individuals to effectively use 
various insulin dosing strategies and tools 
(57,58). See section 5, “Facilitating Positive 
Health Behaviors and Well-being to 
Improve Health Outcomes,” for guidance 
on diabetes self-management education.
Basal Insulin
Basal insulin alone is the most convenient 
initial insulin treatment and can be added 
to noninsulin glucose-lowering medica­
tions. For individuals with type 2 diabetes, 
starting doses can be estimated based on 
body weight (0.1–0.2 units/kg/day) and 
the degree of hyperglycemia, with indi­
vidualized titration over time as needed 
to achieve and maintain glycemic goals. 
The principal action of basal insulin is to 
restrain hepatic glucose production and 
limit hyperglycemia overnight and be­
tween meals (171,172). Attainment of 
fasting glucose goals can be achieved 
with human NPH insulin or a long-acting 
insulin analog. In clinical trials, long-acting 
basal analogs (U-100 glargine) have been 
demonstrated to reduce the risk of level 2 
hypoglycemia and nocturnal hypoglyce­
mia compared with NPH insulin (173). 
Longer-acting basal analogs (U-300 glar­
gine or degludec) convey a lower noctur­
nal hypoglycemia risk than U-100 glargine 
(174,175). It is important to understand 
how to convert individuals from one basal 
insulin to another, as switching insulins 
may be required due to the availability of 
more clinically appropriate insulin alter­
natives, removal of a product from the 
market (i.e., insulin detemir), or changes 
to insurance coverage. Often doses can 
be converted unit for unit and subse­
quently adjusted based on glucose moni­
toring; however, an initial dose reduction 
of 10–20% can be used for individuals in 
very tight management or at high risk for 
hypoglycemia and is typically needed when 
switching from human NPH insulin or 
U-300 glargine to another insulin (176). 
Clinicians should also be aware of the 
potential for overbasalization with insulin 
therapy (i.e., use of higher than clinically 
necessary and appropriate dose of basal 
insulin, typically masking insufficient 
S200 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
mealtime insulin). Clinical signals that 
should prompt evaluation for overbasali­
zation include high bedtime-to-morning 
or postprandial-to-preprandial glucose dif­
ferential (e.g., bedtime-to-morning glucose 
differential ≥50 mg/dL [≥2.8 mmol/L]), hy­
poglycemia (aware or unaware), and high 
glucose variability. Evidence of over-basali­
zation should prompt reevaluation of the 
glucose-lowering treatment plan to better 
address postprandial hyperglycemia (177).
Combination Injectable Therapy and  
Prandial Insulin
If basal insulin has been titrated to an ac­
ceptable fasting blood glucose level and 
A1C remains above goal, if there is evi­
dence of significant postprandial hyper­
glycemia, or if signs of overbasalization 
are present, advancement to combination 
injectable therapy is necessary (Fig. 9.5). 
This approach can use a GLP-1 RA or 
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA added to basal in­
sulin or multiple doses of prandial insulin 
(131,178). If an individual is not already 
being treated with a GLP-1 RA or dual GIP 
and GLP-1 RA, a GLP-1 RA (either as an in­
dividual product or in a fixed-ratio combi­
nation with a basal insulin product) or 
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA should be consid­
ered prior to starting prandial insulin to ad­
dress prandial management and to lower 
the risks of hypoglycemia and weight gain 
associated with insulin therapy (131,178).
Further intensification of insulin ther­
apy entails adding doses of prandial insu­
lin to basal insulin. Starting with a single 
prandial dose with the largest meal of the 
day is simple and effective, and it can be 
advanced to a plan with multiple prandial 
doses if necessary (179). We suggest start­
ing with a prandial insulin dose of 4 units 
or 10% of the amount of basal insulin at 
the largest meal or the meal with the 
greatest postprandial excursion. The pran­
dial insulin plan can then be intensified 
based on individual needs (Fig. 9.5). Alter­
natively, for an individual treated with 
basal insulin in whom additional prandial 
coverage is desired but administering insu­
lin prior to one or more meals is not feasi­
ble, the medication plan can be converted 
to two doses of a premixed insulin. Each 
approach has advantages and disadvan­
tages. For example, basal-prandial plans 
offer greater flexibility for individuals who 
eat on irregular schedules, have variable 
meal content, or otherwise benefit from 
greater individualization and flexibility in 
insulin administration. On the other hand, 
two doses of premixed insulin is a simple, 
convenient means of spreading insulin 
across the day. Moreover, human insulins, 
separately, self-mixed, or as premixed 
NPH/regular (for example, 70/30) formu­
lations, are often less costly alternatives 
to insulin analogs.
Individuals with type 2 diabetes are 
generally more insulin resistant than those 
with type 1 diabetes, require higher daily 
doses (∼1 unit/kg), and have lower rates 
of hypoglycemia (180). Meta-analyses of 
trials comparing rapid-acting insulin ana­
logs with human regular insulin in type 2 
diabetes have not reported meaningful 
differences in A1C or hypoglycemia (181). 
Titration of prandial insulin can be based 
on home self-monitored blood glucose or 
CGM. When significant additions to the 
prandial insulin dose are made, particu­
larly with the evening meal, consideration 
should be given to decreasing basal insulin 
to reduce risk of hypoglycemia. When ini­
tiating intensification of insulin therapy, 
metformin, SGLT2 inhibitors, and GLP-1 
RAs (or a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA) should 
be maintained, unless adverse effects (in­
cluding significant treatment burden) or 
contraindications are present. Use of sul­
fonylureas, meglitinides, and DPP-4 inhibi­
tors should be limited or discontinued, as 
these medications do not have additional 
beneficial effects on cardiovascular, kid­
ney, weight, or liver outcomes, and sulfo­
nylureas and meglitinides increase risk of 
hypoglycemia and weight gain. Adjunctive 
use of pioglitazone may help to improve 
glycemia and reduce the amount of insulin 
needed, although potential side effects 
should be considered and may limit its use.
Once a basal-bolus insulin plan is initi­
ated, dose titration is important, with ad­
justments made in both prandial and 
basal insulins based on blood glucose lev­
els and an understanding of the pharma­
codynamic profile of each formulation 
(also known as pattern control or pattern 
management). In some people with type 2 
diabetes with significant clinical complex­
ity, multimorbidity, and/or treatment bur­
den, it may become necessary to simplify 
or deintensify complex insulin plans to de­
crease risk of hypoglycemia and improve 
quality of life (see section 13, “Older 
Adults”).
Concentrated Insulins
Concentrated preparations may be more 
convenient (fewer injections to achieve 
goal dose) and comfortable (less volume 
to inject the desired dose and/or less 
injection effort) for individuals and may 
improve treatment plan engagement in 
those with insulin resistance who require 
large doses of insulin. Several concen­
trated insulin preparations are currently 
available. U-500 regular insulin is, by defi­
nition, five times more concentrated than 
U-100 regular insulin. U-500 regular insulin 
has distinct pharmacokinetics with similar 
onset but a delayed, blunted, and pro­
longed peak effect and longer duration of 
action compared with U-100 regular insu­
lin; thus, it has characteristics more like a 
premixed intermediate-acting (NPH) and 
regular insulin product and can be used 
as two or three daily injections (182,183). 
U-300 glargine and U-200 degludec are 
three and two times, respectively, as con­
centrated as their U-100 formulations and 
allow higher doses of basal insulin admin­
istration per volume used. U-300 glargine 
has a longer duration of action than U-100 
glargine but modestly lower efficacy per 
unit administered (184–186). The U-200 
formulations of insulin degludec, insulin lis­
pro, and insulin lispro-aabc have pharma­
cokinetics similar to those of their U-100 
counterparts (187–189). While U-500 reg­
ular insulin is available in both prefilled 
pens and vials, other concentrated insulins 
are available only in prefilled pens to 
minimize the risk of dosing errors. If 
U-500 regular insulin vials are prescribed, 
the prescription should be accompanied 
by a specific prescription for U-500 syrin­
ges to minimize the risk of dosing errors.
Alternative Insulin Routes
Insulin is primarily administered via sub­
cutaneous injection or infusion. Adminis­
tration devices provide some additional 
variation in the subcutaneous delivery be­
yond vial and syringe versus insulin pen. 
Those devices include continuous insulin 
pumps (programmable or automated basal 
and bolus settings and fixed basal and bo­
lus settings) and bolus-only insulin patch 
pump. In addition, prandial or correction 
insulin doses may be administered using 
inhaled human insulin. Inhaled insulin is 
available as monomers of regular human 
insulin; studies in individuals with type 1 
diabetes suggest that inhaled insulin has 
pharmacokinetics faster than those of RAA 
(190). Studies comparing inhaled insulin 
with injectable insulin have demonstrated 
its faster onset and shorter duration com­
pared with the RAA insulin lispro as well as 
clinically meaningful A1C reductions and 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S201 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
weight reductions compared with the RAA 
insulin aspart over 24 weeks (190–192). 
Use of inhaled insulin may result in a de­
cline in lung function (reduced forced expi­
ratory volume in 1 s [FEV1]). Inhaled insulin 
is contraindicated in individuals with chronic 
lung disease, such as asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, and is not 
recommended in individuals who smoke or 
who recently stopped smoking. All individu­
als require spirometry (FEV1) testing to iden­
tify potential lung disease prior to and after 
starting inhaled insulin therapy.
ADDITIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
FOR ALL INDIVIDUALS WITH 
DIABETES
Several key aspects of insulin manage­
ment that are relevant to all people 
with diabetes requiring insulin therapy, 
including available formulations, insulin 
plans and delivery systems, administration 
technique, and overbasalization, were dis­
cussed earlier in this section. Additional 
essential components for the glucose- 
lowering management plan that are rele­
vant to people with all types of diabetes 
include encouraging healthy behaviors and 
diabetes self-management education and 
support (see section 5, “Facilitating Positive 
Health Behaviors and Well-being to Improve 
Health Outcomes”), considering social 
determinants of health (see section 1, 
“Improving Care and Promoting Health 
in Populations”), avoiding and preventing 
therapeutic inertia, and prescribing gluca­
gon and affordable diabetes treatments.
Recommendations
9.24 Include healthy behaviors, diabe­
tes self-management education and 
support, avoidance of therapeutic iner­
tia, and social determinants of health 
as essential components of the glucose- 
lowering management of diabetes. A
9.25 Use of continuous glucose moni­
toring (CGM) is recommended at dia­
betes onset and anytime thereafter 
for adults with diabetes who are on 
insulin therapy, A on noninsulin ther­
apies that can cause hypoglycemia, B 
and on any diabetes treatment where 
CGM aids in management. B The 
choice of CGM device and method for 
use should be made based on the in­
dividual’s circumstances, preferences, 
and needs.
9.26 Monitor for signs of overbas­
alization during insulin therapy, such 
as significant bedtime-to-morning or 
postprandial-to-preprandial glucose dif­
ferential, occurrences of hypoglycemia 
(aware or unaware), and high glycemic 
variability. When overbasalization is 
suspected, a thorough reevaluation 
should occur promptly to further tai­
lor therapy to the individual’s needs. E
9.27 Automated insulin delivery sys­
tems should be offered to all adults 
with type 1 and 2 diabetes on insulin 
depending on the person’s or care­
giver’s needs and preferences. A
9.28 Glucagon should be prescribed 
for all individuals taking insulin or 
at high risk for hypoglycemia. A Fam­
ily, caregivers, school personnel, and 
others providing support to these 
individuals should know its location 
and be educated on how to admin­
ister it. Glucagon preparations that 
do not require reconstitution are 
preferred. B
9.29 Routinely assess all people with 
diabetes for financial obstacles that 
could impede their diabetes manage­
ment. Clinicians, members of the dia­
betes care team, and social services 
professionals should work collabora­
tively, as appropriate and feasible, to 
support these individuals by implement­
ing strategies to reduce costs, thereby 
improving their access to evidence- 
based care. E
9.30 In adults with diabetes and 
cost-related barriers, consider use 
of lower-cost medications for gly­
cemic management (i.e., metformin, 
sulfonylureas, thiazolidinediones, and 
human insulin) within the context of 
their risks for hypoglycemia, weight 
gain, cardiovascular and kidney events, 
and other adverse effects. E
Diabetes Technology and Glycemic 
Management
The use of continuous glucose monitoring 
(CGM) in adults with diabetes improves 
glycemic outcomes (e.g., A1C, time in 
range) and reduces episodes of hypogly­
cemia in adults with diabetes who are 
on insulin therapy or other noninsulin 
therapies that can induce hypoglycemia 
(193–209). In addition, the use of AID 
systems should be offered to adults 
with type 1 or type 2 diabetes who are 
on insulin therapy to improve glycemic 
management and glycemic outcomes 
(26,28–32,35–37,210–215). The decision 
of which CGM and/or AID system to use 
should be based on the preference of 
the individual with diabetes and their 
caregivers, availability of resources to pro­
vide the needed training and education, 
and available support. As the diabetes 
technology landscape is rapidly evolving 
and individuals require a tailored ap­
proach, health care teams may encounter 
challenges with determining the best 
technology for people with diabetes. 
An ADA resource, which can be found 
at diabetes.org/living-with-diabetes/ 
treatment-care/diabetes-technology- 
guide, can provide helpful information 
for health care professionals and indi­
viduals with diabetes in making decisions 
regarding technology. For more informa­
tion on diabetes technology, see section 7, 
“Diabetes Technology.”
Glucagon
Due to the risk of hypoglycemia with insu­
lin treatment, all individuals treated with 
insulin or who are at high risk for hypogly­
cemia should be prescribed glucagon. Indi­
viduals with diabetes who are prescribed 
glucagon and those in close contact with 
them should be educated on the use and 
administration of the individual’s pre­
scribed glucagon product. The glucagon 
product available to individuals may differ 
based on coverage and cost; however, 
products that do not require reconstitu­
tion are preferred for ease of administra­
tion (216,217). Clinicians should routinely 
review the individual’s access to glucagon, 
as appropriate glucagon prescribing is 
low (218–220). See section 6, “Glycemic 
Goals, Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic 
Crises,” for additional information on hy­
poglycemia and glucagon in individuals 
with diabetes.
Medication Costs and Affordability
Costs for noninsulin and insulin diabetes 
medications have increased dramatically 
over the past two decades, and an in­
creasing proportion of cost is now passed 
on to people with diabetes and their fam­
ilies (221). Table 9.3 provides cost infor­
mation for currently approved noninsulin 
therapies, while Table 9.4 provides these 
data for insulin. Of note, prices listed are 
average wholesale prices (AWP) (222) 
and National Average Drug Acquisition 
Costs (NADAC) (223); these estimates al­
low for a comparison of drug prices but 
do not represent the actual costs to 
S202 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
people with diabetes because they do 
not account for various discounts, rebates, 
and other price adjustments often involved 
in prescription sales that affect the actual 
cost incurred by the individual. Medication 
costs can be a major source of stress for 
people with diabetes and contribute to 
worse medication-taking behavior (224); 
cost-reducing strategies may improve 
medication-taking behavior in some cases 
(225).
Table 9.3—Median monthly (30-day) AWP and NADAC of maximum approved daily dose of noninsulin glucose-lowering 
agents in the U.S.
Class
Compound
Dosage strength/ 
product (if applicable)
Maximum approved  
daily dose†
Median AWP  
(min, max)*
Median NADAC  
(min, max)*
Biguanides
• Metformin
500 mg (IR)
2,000 mg
$85 ($3, $216)
$2
500 mg (ER)
2,000 mg
$89 ($5, $6,719)
$3
850 mg (IR)
2,550 mg
$108 ($3, $189)
$2
1,000 mg (IR)
2,000 mg
$87 ($2, $144)
$1
1,000 mg (ER)
2,000 mg
$1,884 ($242, $7,214)
$26 ($24, $28)
500 mg (Sol)
2,000 mg
$810 ($810, $1,478)
$417
Sulfonylureas (2nd generation)
• Glimepiride
4 mg
8 mg
$73 ($71, $198)
$2
• Glipizide
10 mg (IR)
40 mg
$72 ($67, $91)
$6
10 mg (XL/ER)
20 mg
$48
$9
• Glyburide
6 mg (micronized)
12 mg
$54 ($48, $71)
$13
5 mg
20 mg
$88 ($63, $432)
$7
Thiazolidinedione
• Pioglitazone
45 mg
45 mg
$348 ($7, $349)
$4
α-Glucosidase inhibitors  
• Acarbose
100 mg
300 mg
$106 ($104, $378)
$22
• Miglitol
100 mg
300 mg
$294 ($241, $346)
$183
Meglitinides
• Nateglinide
120 mg
360 mg
$104
$16
• Repaglinide
2 mg
16 mg
$878 ($799, $1,728)
$28
DPP-4 inhibitors
• Alogliptin
25 mg
25 mg
$234
$143
• Linagliptin
5 mg
5 mg
$630
$504
• Saxagliptin
5 mg
5 mg
$524 ($523, $524)
$179
• Sitagliptin
100 mg
100 mg
$341
$303
25 mg/mL
100 mg
$354
NA
SGLT2 inhibitors 
• Bexagliflozin
20 mg
20 mg
$47
NA
• Canagliflozin
300 mg
300 mg
$718
$575
• Dapagliflozin
10 mg
10 mg
$664
$345
• Empagliflozin
25 mg
25 mg
$629
$604
• Ertugliflozin
15 mg
15 mg
$428
$343
GLP-1 RAs
• Dulaglutide
4.5 mg pen
4.5 mg‡
$1,185
$953
• Liraglutide
18 mg/3 mL pen
1.8 mg
$929 ($845, $929)
$577
• Semaglutide
2 mg pen
2 mg‡
$1,197
$966
14 mg (tablet)
14 mg
$1,197
$965
Dual GIP and GLP-1 RA 
• Tirzepatide
15 mg pen
15 mg‡
$1,296
$1,041
Bile acid sequestrant 
• Colesevelam
625 mg tabs
3.75 g
$692 ($674, $712)
$56
3.75 g suspension
3.75 g
$674 ($673, $675)
$93
Dopamine-2 agonist 
• Bromocriptine
0.8 mg
4.8 mg
$1,188
$957
AWP, average wholesale price; DPP-4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4; ER and XL, extended release; GIP, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide; 
GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; IR, immediate release; max, maximum; min, minimum; NA, data not available; NADAC, Na­
tional Average Drug Acquisition Cost; SGLT2, sodium–glucose cotransporter 2; Sol, solution. AWP and NADAC prices as of 15 July 2025.
*Calculated for 30-day supply (AWP [222] or NADAC [223] unit price × number of doses required to provide maximum approved daily dose 
× 30 days); median AWP or NADAC listed alone when only one product and/or price. †Used to calculate median AWP and NADAC (min, 
max); generic prices used, if available commercially. ‡Administered once weekly.
Caps on out-of-pocket costs for insulin 
have been implemented for individuals 
with Medicare insurance (to $35 per 
insulin prescription per month) and indi­
viduals with state-regulated commercial 
insurance plans who live in 26 states and 
the District of Columbia that implemented 
such legislation (to either $35 per insulin 
prescription per month or $100 per total 
monthly insulin payment) (226–228). Ad­
ditionally, insulin manufacturers have in­
troduced cost reductions and copayment 
assistance programs; however, these do 
not cover all insulins, and the copayment 
assistance programs have variable eligibil­
ity requirements and reduce out-of-pocket 
payments to variable degrees (229) (see 
section 1, “Improving Care and Promoting 
Health in Populations”). Individuals with 
high-deductible health plans and those 
without insurance coverage can incur very 
high out-of-pocket expenses for glucose- 
lowering therapies. Moreover, no such 
caps exist for diabetes medical equipment 
(i.e., equipment for glucose monitoring 
and insulin administration) or for nonin­
sulin medications. It is therefore essen­
tial to screen all people with diabetes 
for financial concerns and cost-related 
barriers to care and to engage mem­
bers of the health care team, including 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S203 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
pharmacists, certified diabetes care and 
education specialists, social workers, com­
munity health workers, community para­
medics, and others, to identify cost-saving 
opportunities for medications, diabetes 
durable medical equipment, and glucagon 
(230).
Recommendations
9.31a Use of compounded products 
that are not approved by the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is 
not recommended due to uncertainty 
about their content and resulting con­
cerns about safety, quality, and effec­
tiveness. C
9.31b If a glucose-lowering medication 
is unavailable (e.g., in shortage), it is 
Table 9.4—Median cost of insulin products in the U.S. calculated as AWP and NADAC per 1,000 units of specified dosage 
form/product
Insulins 
Compounds 
Dosage form/product
Median AWP  
(min, max)*
Median NADAC  
(min, max)*
Rapid-acting
• Aspart     
U-100 vial
$87†
$70†
U-100 cartridge
$107†
$86†
U-100 prefilled pen
$112†
$90†
• Aspart biosimilars#
U-100 vial
$83
NA
U-100 prefilled pen
$107
NA
• Aspart (“faster acting 
product”) 
U-100 vial
$347
$278
U-100 cartridge
$430
$344
U-100 prefilled pen
$447
$358
• Glulisine 
U-100 vial
$102
$82
U-100 prefilled pen
$132
$105
• Inhaled insulin 
Inhalation cartridges
$1,578
$1,265
• Lispro 
U-100 vial
$30†
$24†
U-100 cartridge
$123
$98
U-100 prefilled pen
$127†
$102†
U-200 prefilled pen
$424
$339
• Lispro-aabc 
U-100 vial
$330
$263
U-100 prefilled pen
$424
$339
U-200 prefilled pen
$424
$339
• Lispro follow-on product 
U-100 vial
$118
$110
U-100 prefilled pen
$151
$121
Short-acting 
• Human regular 
U-100 vial
$56 ($54, $58)‡
$44 ($43, $46)‡
U-100 prefilled pen
$73
$58
Intermediate-acting 
• Human NPH 
U-100 vial
$58 ($54, $58)‡
$45 ($43, $46)‡
U-100 prefilled pen
$93 ($73, $113)
$74 ($58, $91)
Concentrated human regular  
insulin 
• U-500 human regular insulin 
U-500 vial
$178
$143
U-500 prefilled pen
$230
$183
Long-acting
• Degludec 
U-100 vial
$142†
$114†
U-100 prefilled pen
$142†
$114†
U-200 prefilled pen
$142†
$114†
• Glargine 
U-100 vial  
U-100 prefilled pen
$77  
$77
$62  
$62
U-300 prefilled pen
$152
$122†
• Glargine biosimilar/follow-on  
products
U-100 vial
$76†
$61†
U-100 prefilled pen
$74 ($74,† $261)
$59 ($59,† $209)
Premixed insulin products
• Aspart 70/30 
U-100 vial
$87†‡
$69†‡
U-100 prefilled pen
$112†‡
$90†‡
• Lispro 50/50 
U-100 vial
$102
NA
U-100 prefilled pen
$127
$102
• Lispro 75/25 
U-100 vial
$102
$82
U-100 prefilled pen
$127†
$102†
• NPH/regular 70/30 
U-100 vial
$56 ($54, $58)
$45 ($43, $46)
U-100 prefilled pen
$93 ($73, $113)‡
$74 ($58, $90)‡
Premixed insulin/GLP-1  
RA products
• Degludec/liraglutide 
100/3.6 mg prefilled pen
$1,073
$859
• Glargine/lixisenatide 
100/33 mg prefilled pen
$713
$571
AWP, average wholesale price; GLP-1 RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; NA, data not available; NADAC, National Average Drug Ac­
quisition Cost. AWP (222) and NADAC (223) prices as of 15 July 2025. *AWP or NADAC calculated as in Table 9.3. †Unbranded product prices 
used when available. ‡AWP and NADAC data presented do not include human insulins (approximately $25/vial or $43/box of 5 pens) or select 
analog insulins (approximately $73/vial or $86/box of 5 pens) available at Walmart; median listed alone when only one product and/or price.
#Pricing for aspart-xjhz not available on 15 July 2025.
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES AND 
POPULATIONS
S204 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Therapeutic Strategies With 
Medication Unavailability
Health care professionals and people with 
diabetes struggle when medication sup­
plies are insufficient to meet the demand. 
Examples of such circumstances include 
recalls involving a number of metformin 
products and the marked increase in de­
mand for agents from the GLP-1 RA and 
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA classes. The latter 
circumstance led to such a low level of 
availability that products were determined 
by the FDA to be in shortage (231). To as­
sist with supply of medications during the 
time they are in shortage (as signaled by 
their inclusion on the FDA Drug Shortages 
Database), compounding pharmacies and 
outsourcing compounding facilities are al­
lowed to make copies, or products that 
are essentially duplicates of the marketed 
FDA-approved product (232). A significant 
number of concerning reports regarding 
safety and efficacy of compounded incre­
tin products have emerged, including using 
salt forms of the FDA-approved product’s 
active ingredient that are not proven safe 
or effective for use in humans, incorpora­
tion of additional ingredients not clinically 
tested when mixed with incretin products 
(e.g., vitamin B12 and vitamin B6), prod­
ucts provided in nonstandard concentra­
tions and doses and/or multidose vials 
and prefilled syringes not accompanied by 
education or labeling to mitigate adminis­
tration errors, and the emergence of coun­
terfeit products that pose significant risk to 
individuals taking these products (233–236). 
Due to safety, quality, and effectiveness 
concerns, use of non-FDA-approved com­
pounded products is not recommended 
(237). Instead, consider switching to a 
different FDA-approved medication as 
clinically appropriate (238). Once the de­
sired FDA-approved product becomes 
available, individuals should be reas­
sessed to determine the appropriate­
ness of resuming the product based on 
their current care needs, preferences, 
and priorities.
recommended to switch to a different 
FDA-approved medication with similar 
efficacy, as clinically appropriate. E
9.31c Upon resolution of the unavail­
ability (e.g., shortage), reassess the ap­
propriateness of resuming the original 
FDA-approved medication. E
9.32a Individuals of childbearing poten­
tial with diabetes should be counseled 
on contraception options A and the im­
pact of some glucose-lowering medica­
tions on contraception efficacy. C
9.32b A person-centered shared deci­
sion-making approach to preconception 
planning is essential for all individuals 
of childbearing potential with diabetes. 
A Preconception planning should ad­
dress attainment of glycemic goals, A 
the time frame for discontinuing nonin­
sulin glucose-lowering medications, E 
and optimal glycemic management in 
preparation for pregnancy. A
9.33 Individuals who develop hyper­
glycemia during treatment with im­
munotherapy (including anti-PD-1 or 
anti-PD-L1 therapy, e.g., nivolumab, 
pembrolizumab, or avelumab) should 
be assessed for the immediate need 
for initiation of insulin therapy due to 
the potential risk of diabetic ketoacido­
sis while additional testing is completed 
to determine if the hyperglycemia is 
related to immunotherapy-associated 
diabetes. Close monitoring, education, 
and dose adjustment are needed if in­
sulin is started. C
9.34 Consider metformin as the first- 
line treatment of hyperglycemia due 
to mTOR inhibitors. E
9.35a Consider metformin as the first- 
line treatment of hyperglycemia due 
to phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) in­
hibitors that affect the α isoform (e.g., 
alpelisib and inavolisib). E
9.35b Use of insulin should be re­
served for severe hyperglycemia and 
hyperglycemic crises due to its poten­
tial impact on the efficacy of PI3K in­
hibitors. E
9.36 Adjust or initiate additional glucose- 
lowering therapies to maintain indi­
vidualized glycemic goals based on 
the specific glucocorticoid treatment 
plan, with frequent reassessment of 
glucose levels and glucocorticoid treat­
ment plans. C
9.37 In adults with posttransplantation 
diabetes mellitus (PTDM) or preexisting 
type 2 diabetes, insulin is preferred for 
the management of hyperglycemia in 
the postoperative setting. A A DPP-4 
inhibitor can be considered for mild 
hyperglycemia. A
9.38a In adults with PTDM or preexist­
ing type 2 diabetes, noninsulin pharma­
cotherapy can be used for long-term 
glycemic management, C and medi­
cation selection may differ depending 
on the transplanted organ(s). E
9.38b In adults with PTDM or preex­
isting type 2 diabetes, a GLP-1 RA 
can be considered for long-term gly­
cemic management due to additional 
cardiometabolic benefits (e.g., car­
diovascular, kidney, weight, and liver 
benefits). C
9.38c If long-term individualized gly­
cemic goals cannot be achieved or 
maintained with noninsulin pharma­
cotherapy in adults with PTDM or 
preexisting type 2 diabetes, con­
sider adding insulin. C
9.39 Educate individuals with diabe­
tes who are at risk for developing dia­
betic ketoacidosis and who are treated 
with SGLT inhibition on the risks and 
signs of ketoacidosis and methods of 
risk mitigation management, provide 
them with appropriate tools for 
ketone measurement (i.e., serum 
β-hydroxybutyrate), and discourage 
a ketogenic eating pattern. E
Care Considerations for Individuals 
of Childbearing Potential
The impact of glycemia during pregnancy is 
well understood; however, evidence for 
the safe use of noninsulin glucose-lowering 
medications is limited (see section 15, 
“Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy”). 
Studies on the efficacy and safety of 
glucose-lowering medications exclude indi­
viduals who are pregnant and require indi­
viduals of childbearing potential to use one 
or two forms of contraception. It is recom­
mended that individuals of childbearing 
potential use a form of contraception 
when also taking glucose-lowering medi­
cations with unknown risks, limited evi­
dence on safety, or known risks during 
pregnancy, regardless of the individual’s 
intention to become pregnant, as many 
pregnancies are unplanned. The options 
for contraception should be discussed 
with all individuals of childbearing poten­
tial with diabetes and should include in­
formation regarding the potential impact 
of glucose-lowering medications on the 
effectiveness of contraception. Medica­
tions that affect gastrointestinal emptying 
time (e.g., GLP-1 RAs or dual GIP and GLP-1 
RA) may affect the absorption of orally ad­
ministered medications, including oral con­
traception. The impact on gastric emptying 
with GLP-1 RAs and the dual GIP and GLP-1 
RA is highest at initiation and with dosage 
increases and then diminishes with contin­
ued administration (239). Tirzepatide, the 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S205 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, was shown to af­
fect the levels of oral contraception during 
the time of its highest impact on gastric 
emptying; the GLP-1 RAs may affect the 
levels of oral contraception as well but to a 
lesser extent than tirzepatide (240,241). 
Thus, individuals starting or increasing doses 
of tirzepatide who also take oral contra­
ception should use a second form of con­
traception until the maintenance dose of 
tirzepatide is achieved and used for at 
least 4 weeks (242).
Preconception counseling should be 
part of the routine care of individuals 
with diabetes who have childbearing 
potential. Counseling should include the 
known benefits and risks of glucose- 
lowering medications as well as other 
medications (e.g., lipid-lowering and anti­
hypertensive therapies) during pregnancy 
and recommendations for when changes 
in medications should occur prior to 
pregnancy. Individuals planning pregnancy 
should be counseled that a period of sev­
eral months is usually needed and adjust­
ment of therapy approved for use in 
pregnancy to achieve preconception gly­
cemic goals prior to pregnancy (see sec­
tion 15, “Management of Diabetes in 
Pregnancy,” for more information on 
preconception counseling and glucose- 
lowering treatment during pregnancy).
Therapeutic Strategies for 
Individuals Receiving Cancer 
Treatment
Hyperglycemia due to chemotherapy may 
either be transient (improving upon treat­
ment cessation) or represent permanent 
diabetes. Immune checkpoint inhibitors 
(ICIs) impair regulatory components of the 
immune system, allowing for immuno­
genic response against cancer cells, which 
can result in autoimmune toxicities, includ­
ing an autoimmune form of diabetes that 
results in β-cell destruction (incidence ap­
proximately ≤1%) (243–246). This form of 
diabetes is most common after exposure 
to ICIs that target programmed cell death 
protein 1 (PD-1) (i.e., nivolumab and pem­
brolizumab) and those that target pro­
grammed cell death protein ligand 1 (PD-L1) 
(i.e., durvalumab and avelumab). ICIs that 
target cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–associated 
protein 4 (CTLA-4) (i.e., ipilimumab) have 
also been implicated in this process, but 
much less commonly (247).
Hyperglycemia as a result of ICIs can 
occur at any time after the initiation of 
therapy—as quickly as 1 week after the 
first dose to up to 12 months after. Insulin 
therapy is the cornerstone of manage­
ment, as individuals typically present with 
rapid-onset, severe hyperglycemia or DKA 
(248). Early initiation of therapy can pre­
vent these drastic presentations, and the 
initiation of basal insulin should be con­
sidered in individuals with blood glucose 
>250 mg/dL while further evaluation takes 
place. Prandial insulin is often required as 
well, if insulinopenia is confirmed. ICI treat­
ment should not be discontinued in the 
event of severe hyperglycemia, as the 
β-cell destruction associated with this 
process is irreversible. Lifelong insulin 
therapy is generally required (249).
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) 
inhibitors are small molecules that inhibit 
intracellular signaling, interfering with 
cancer cell proliferation and survival. Four 
isoforms have been identified as thera­
peutic targets, with both pan-PI3K in­
hibitors and isoform-specific inhibitors 
in clinical use. The α isoform of this en­
zyme (PI3Kα) is also involved in insulin 
signaling, and the inhibition of this path­
way by either pan-PI3K inhibitors (i.e., co­
panlisib and duvelisib) or specific PI3Kα 
inhibitors (i.e., alpelisib and inavolisib) 
can lead to hyperglycemia (250). Hyper­
glycemia typically occurs within the first 2 
weeks of therapy, with an incidence of 
approximately 60% (251–254). Risk fac­
tors include preexisting dysglycemia, BMI 
>25 kg/m2, and age >65 years. Adequate 
management is crucial, as uncontrolled 
hyperglycemia can lead to discontinua­
tion and/or reduction in medication dose, 
which can negatively affect the efficacy of 
the therapy (254–256).
Metformin is the first-line oral agent to 
treat PI3K inhibitor–induced hyperglyce­
mia, with uptitration of the dose as toler­
ated (256). Pioglitazone is also an option 
as monotherapy or in combination with 
metformin, but its slow onset of action 
can limit its effectiveness (257). SGLT2 in­
hibitors have also shown efficacy, but 
close monitoring is needed, as ketoacido­
sis has been reported (258). Insulin and 
sulfonylureas should be considered only 
as a last resort, as increased insulin levels 
may reactivate the PI3K pathway, coun­
teracting the antitumor effects of PI3K 
inhibition (256,259). There is no direct ev­
idence for the use of GLP-1 RAs for PI3K 
inhibitor–induced hyperglycemia. They 
should not be considered for treatment 
in this circumstance at this time due to 
their uncertain effect on PI3K inhibitor 
efficacy (based on their increase in insulin 
secretion) and the potential to cause nau­
sea and vomiting.
mTOR kinase inhibitors, including everi­
lomus, cause hyperglycemia by interfering 
with insulin signaling, leading to impaired 
insulin secretion and increased insulin re­
sistance. Metformin is the first-line treat­
ment of hyperglycemia secondary to 
mTOR inhibitor treatment because of 
its efficacy and safety profile. Due to 
its ability to reduce insulin resistance, 
pioglitazone may be considered as a 
second-line treatment, depending on the 
risks of its adverse effects to the individ­
ual. There is no direct evidence regarding 
the efficacy of GLP-1 RAs or SGLT2 inhibi­
tors for mTOR inhibitor–induced hypergly­
cemia; however, there is also no evidence 
that they impair the efficacy of the mTOR 
inhibitor. Thus, evaluation of their use as 
second- or third-line treatments for this 
circumstance should be made based on 
their overall benefits and risks. Insulin is 
typically reserved for cases of refractory 
hyperglycemia after noninsulin treat­
ments are used, in the presence of intol­
erance or contraindications to noninsulin 
treatments, or for severe hyperglycemia 
(260–262).
Glucocorticoids (including prednisone 
and dexamethasone), which are often 
used as part of acute, adjunctive, and 
chronic treatment of cancer and inflam­
matory conditions (e.g., rheumatoid ar­
thritis and inflammatory bowel disease) 
as well as posttransplantation, cause hy­
perglycemia primarily by increased insulin 
resistance and hepatic glucose produc­
tion. Other contributing effects include in­
creased appetite, decreased production/ 
secretion of insulin, and enhanced effects 
of counterregulatory hormones (such as 
epinephrine) (263–266). The timing and 
extent of hyperglycemia vary based on 
the dose, duration, route of administra­
tion (i.e., intravenous, oral, or intraarticu­
lar) and the specific glucocorticoid used 
(265–271). For example, with morning 
administration of prednisone (with the 
first meal of the day), glucose starts rising 
after the first meal, with peak effects in 
the afternoon and evening, and declines 
to baseline by the next morning; in con­
trast, with a single dose of dexametha­
sone, glucose elevations may last more 
than 24 h with some decline overnight. 
The extent of the elevation is dependent 
on the dose, so as the glucocorticoid is ta­
pered, the extent of hyperglycemia will 
S206 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
decline. Monitoring glucose levels solely 
in the morning may miss the extent of 
the hyperglycemia experienced due to 
glucocorticoid use and prevent appropriate 
management (263,265–267,272). Thus, 
glucose-lowering medication adjustments 
or additions should match the timing and 
extent of hyperglycemia and allow for 
rapid adjustment as the dose of the glu­
cocorticoid dose changes to minimize the 
likelihood of hyperglycemia and hypogly­
cemia. Insulin is the most frequently used 
glucose-lowering medication to manage 
hyperglycemia secondary to glucocorti­
coid use. The selection of insulin type and 
dose depends on the dose and dura­
tion of the glucocorticoid (265,266,269, 
272–275). Additions or dose adjustments 
of sulfonylureas, including meglitinides, 
have also been used for those with 
type 2 diabetes or no previous diagno­
sis of diabetes. Due to lack of direct evi­
dence and the time needed to achieve 
the glucose-lowering effect, additions 
or dose adjustments of other glucose- 
lowering medications are reserved for 
when stable doses of glucocorticoids are 
chronically administered and are not for 
acute management (265,266,269,272, 
275,276).
Pancreatic Diabetes and Cystic 
Fibrosis–Related Diabetes
Individuals with pancreatic diabetes may 
require early insulin initiation to achieve 
and maintain glycemic goals. In individu­
als with a history of pancreatitis, use of 
incretin medications (i.e., GLP-1 RAs, a 
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA, and DPP-4 inhibi­
tors) should be avoided (see section 2, 
“Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes”). 
Individuals with cystic fibrosis–related dia­
betes should be treated with insulin ther­
apy; insulin pump therapy, including AID 
systems, should be considered when ap­
propriate (277).
Posttransplantation Diabetes Mellitus
The diagnosis of posttransplantation dia­
betes mellitus (PTDM) relies on the same 
glycemic characteristics as other forms of 
diabetes. However, due to the unique ef­
fects of immunosuppressant drugs, an 
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) is the 
preferred and most accurate method for 
diagnosis (compared with A1C or fasting 
plasma glucose) (278). In 2024, an up­
date from the 3rd International PTDM 
Consensus Meeting recommended screen­
ing for diabetes risk factors with a 
pretransplant OGTT while the individual 
is on the waitlist, followed by early OGTT 
at 3 months posttransplantation to diag­
nose PTDM and a late OGTT at 1 year 
and onward as appropriate (279).
As with all strategies in metabolic man­
agement, lifestyle modifications remain a 
mainstay of long-term management. The 
Comparing Glycaemic Benefits of Active 
Versus Passive Lifestyle Intervention in 
Kidney Allograft Recipients (CAVIAR) study 
compared active and passive lifestyles 
after kidney transplantation using be­
havior therapy and found a statistically 
significant reduction in fat mass and 
weight loss with active lifestyle. However, 
there were no changes in the primary 
outcomes of glucose metabolism (i.e., in­
sulin secretion, insulin sensitivity, or dis­
position index). The rate of PTDM was 
halved in the active group, but this find­
ing was not statistically significant (280).
In early postoperative periods, insulin 
is the preferred drug for glycemic man­
agement due to its lack of interactions 
with other transplant medications, imme­
diate efficacy, and added potential to pre­
vent PTDM, albeit with the expected risk 
of hypoglycemia (281–283). Sulfonylureas 
may also be used for individuals with sta­
ble kidney function with similar precau­
tions of hypoglycemia, but they may not 
confer any added metabolic benefits out­
side of glucose management (284).
Although still limited, data are increas­
ing to inform the optimal pharmacologic 
management of PTDM and preexisting 
type 2 diabetes at the time of transplant 
(285,286) (for diagnosis and classification 
of PTDM, see section 2, “Diagnosis and 
Classification of Diabetes”). While many in­
dividuals require insulin therapy imme­
diately posttransplantation, noninsulin 
therapies can be used for long-term man­
agement. Studies of metformin, DPP-4 in­
hibitors, SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP-1 RAs, and 
pioglitazone in individuals who have un­
dergone solid organ transplantation have 
demonstrated effectiveness and safety 
but are limited by small sample sizes, 
short follow-up, and risk of bias due to 
retrospective, single-center, or single-arm 
prospective designs (287). The majority 
of studies are in individuals who have 
undergone kidney transplantation, but 
studies in liver and heart transplantation 
are available to a lesser degree as well. 
Selection of pharmacotherapeutic classes 
should take into account organ-specific 
physiology, immunosuppressant plan, and 
general metabolic and cardiovascular 
circumstances.
Metformin can be used but with cau­
tion; it should not be initiated if eGFR is 
<45 mL/min/1.73 m2, and it should be 
discontinued with eGFR <30 mL/min/ 
1.73 m2. Limitations in metformin use in­
clude the risk of lactic acidosis with fluctu­
ating kidney function, either with graft 
dysfunction or rejection in kidney trans­
plantation or acute kidney injury in other 
solid organ transplantation. Metformin 
use may be associated with lower risks of 
cardiac allograft vasculopathy after heart 
transplantation (288) and all-cause, malig­
nancy-related, and infection-related mor­
tality after kidney transplantation (289).
DPP-4 inhibitors have been shown to 
be safe and effective posttransplantation 
in RCTs, even in the immediate posttrans­
plant period for mild hyperglycemia or 
impaired glucose tolerance, and have the 
potential to decrease progression to PTDM 
(290).
GLP-1 RA therapy may be preferred for 
many individuals, as shown by increasing 
evidence from large retrospective studies 
on the benefits of GLP-1 RAs on cardio­
vascular, kidney, weight loss, and glucose 
lowering outcomes. Studies have not found 
any concern for negative interaction with 
immunosuppressants, which would ne­
cessitate changes in in dosing (291–303). 
However, caution should be used when 
gastrointestinal side effects occur, particu­
larly if individuals have this additive effect 
to the side effects of the immunosuppres­
sants. Additionally, in lung transplant recip­
ients, gastroparesis and gastroesophageal 
reflux are of particular concern, as these 
conditions may induce allograft lung dam­
age and are frequent side effects of GLP-1 
RAs. A gastric emptying study may be use­
ful in identifying ideal candidates before 
initiation.
SGLT2 inhibitors may be similarly pre­
ferred for individuals with ASCVD, HF, 
and CKD and appear to be safe and effec­
tive in PTDM (304–309). However, there 
is increased risk of genitourinary tract in­
fection, which is of particular concern in 
immunosuppressed individuals. Of note, 
kidney transplant recipients have an in­
nate anatomical increased risk of urinary 
tract infections (UTIs), particularly imme­
diately posttransplant when the ureteral 
stent is still in place. Prior history of UTIs 
and individual risk of UTIs should be con­
sidered when using this class after kidney 
transplant.
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S207 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
It is essential that diabetes manage­
ment posttransplantation is implemented 
in the setting of an interprofessional team. 
The transplant physicians and the endocri­
nologists should work collaboratively to 
monitor for medication toxicity and delete­
rious side effects that may affect allograft 
function and to optimize cardiovascular 
and metabolic outcomes.
Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the 
Young
Individuals with maturity-onset diabetes 
of the young due to HNF1A and HNF4A 
mutations can be treated with low-dose 
sulfonylurea therapy but may ultimately re­
quire insulin therapy (310) (see section 2, 
“Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes”) 
(Table 2.7). For those with HNF1A muta­
tions, addition of a DPP-4 inhibitor to the 
sulfonylurea may help improve glycemic var­
iability and attainment of glycemic goals 
(311). Individuals with neonatal diabetes 
due to KCNJ22 and ABCC8 mutations can 
be treated with high-dose sulfonylureas, 
while those with INS, GATA6, EIF2AK3, and 
FOXP3 mutations require insulin therapy 
(310).
SGLT Inhibition and Risk of Ketosis
Individuals with type 1 diabetes (83,312) 
and insulin-deficient type 2 diabetes are 
at increased risk for DKA with SGLT inhibitor 
therapy (SGLT2 inhibitors or the SGLT1/2 in­
hibitor). SGLT inhibitor–associated DKA oc­
curs in approximately 4% of people with 
type 1 diabetes; the risk can be 5–17 times 
higher than that in people with type 1 
diabetes not treated with SGLT inhibitors 
(313). It is important to note that SGLT2 in­
hibitors are not approved for use in people 
with type 1 diabetes. In contrast, DKA is un­
common in people with type 2 diabetes 
treated with SGLT inhibitors, with an esti­
mated incidence of 0.6–4.9 events per 
1,000 person-years (314). Risk factors 
for DKA in individuals with either type 1 
or type 2 diabetes treated with SGLT in­
hibitors include very-low-carbohydrate eat­
ing patterns, prolonged fasting, dehydration, 
excessive alcohol intake, and other common 
precipitating factors (83,312). Up to a third 
of people treated with SGLT2 inhibitors who 
developed DKA present with glucose levels 
<200 mg/dL (<11.1 mmol/L) (315), and in 
one study 71% presented with glucose 
levels ≤250 mg/dL (≤13.9 mmol/L) 
(316); therefore, it is important to edu­
cate at-risk individuals about the signs 
and symptoms of DKA and DKA mitigation 
and management and to prescribe accu­
rate tools for ketone measurement. Indi­
viduals who have experienced DKA should 
not be treated with SGLT inhibition. Addi­
tional guidance on DKA risk mitigation is 
available in section 6, “Glycemic Goals, 
Hypoglycemia, and Hyperglycemic Crises.”
References
1. Diabetes Control and Complications Trial 
(DCCT)/Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions 
and Complications (EDIC) Study Research Group. 
Mortality in type 1 diabetes in the DCCT/EDIC 
versus the general population. Diabetes Care 
2016;39:1378–1383
2. Lachin JM, Bebu I, Nathan DM; DCCT/EDIC 
Research Group. The beneficial effects of earlier 
versus later implementation of intensive therapy in 
type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 2021;44:2225–2230
3. Lachin JM, Nathan DM; DCCT/EDIC Research 
Group. Understanding metabolic memory: the 
prolonged influence of glycemia during the Diabetes 
Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) on future 
risks of complications during the study of the 
Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and 
Complications (EDIC). Diabetes Care 2021;44: 
2216–2224
4. Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al. The 
management of type 1 diabetes in adults. a 
consensus report by the American Diabetes 
Association (ADA) and the European Association 
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 
2021;44:2589–2625
5. Tricco AC, Ashoor HM, Antony J, et al. Safety, 
effectiveness, and cost effectiveness of long 
acting versus intermediate acting insulin for 
patients with type 1 diabetes: systematic review 
and network meta-analysis. BMJ 2014;349:g5459
6. Bartley PC, Bogoev M, Larsen J, Philotheou A. 
Long-term efficacy and safety of insulin detemir 
compared to Neutral Protamine Hagedorn insulin 
in patients with type 1 diabetes using a treat-to- 
target basal-bolus regimen with insulin aspart at 
meals: a 2-year, randomized, controlled trial. 
Diabet Med 2008;25:442–449
7. Little S, Shaw J, Home P. Hypoglycemia rates 
with basal insulin analogs. Diabetes Technol Ther 
2011;13(Suppl. 1):S53–S64
8. Aronson R, Biester T, Leohr J, et al. Ultra rapid 
lispro showed greater reduction in postprandial 
glucose versus Humalog in children, adolescents 
and adults with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 
Obes Metab 2023;25:1964–1972
9. Heise T, Pieber TR, Danne T, Erichsen L, Haahr 
H. A pooled analysis of clinical pharmacology trials 
investigating the pharmacokinetic and pharma- 
codynamic characteristics of fast-acting insulin aspart 
in adults with type 1 diabetes. Clin Pharmacokinet 
2017;56:551–559
10. Bode BW, McGill JB, Lorber DL, Gross JL, 
Chang PC, Bregman DB; Affinity 1 Study Group. 
Inhaled Technosphere insulin compared with 
injected prandial insulin in type 1 diabetes: a 
randomized 24-week trial. Diabetes Care 2015;38: 
2266–2273
11. Russell-Jones D, Bode BW, De Block C, et al. 
Fast-acting insulin aspart improves glycemic 
control in basal-bolus treatment for type 1 diabetes: 
results of a 26-week multicenter, active-controlled, 
treat-to-target, randomized, parallel-group trial 
(onset 1). Diabetes Care 2017;40:943–950
12. Klaff L, Cao D, Dellva MA, et al. Ultra rapid 
lispro improves postprandial glucose control 
compared with lispro in patients with type 1 
diabetes: results from the 26-week PRONTO-T1D 
study. Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:1799–1807
13. Lane W, Bailey TS, Gerety G, et al.; SWITCH 
1. Effect of insulin degludec vs insulin glargine 
U100 on hypoglycemia in patients with type 1 
diabetes: the SWITCH 1 randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA 2017;318:33–44
14. Home PD, Bergenstal RM, Bolli GB, et al. 
New insulin glargine 300 units/mL versus glargine 
100 units/mL in people with type 1 diabetes: a 
randomized, phase 3a, open-label clinical trial 
(EDITION 4). Diabetes Care 2015;38:2217–2225
15. Yeh H-C, Brown TT, Maruthur N, et al. 
Comparative effectiveness and safety of methods 
of insulin delivery and glucose monitoring for 
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Ann Intern Med 2012;157:336–347
16. Speight J, Choudhary P, Wilmot EG, et al. 
Impact of glycaemic technologies on quality of 
life and related outcomes in adults with type 1 
diabetes: a narrative review. Diabet Med 2023;40: 
e14944
17. Tzivian L, Sokolovska J, Grike AE, et al. 
Quantitative and qualitative analysis of the 
quality of life of type 1 diabetes patients using 
insulin pumps and of those receiving multiple daily 
insulin injections. Health Qual Life Outcomes 
2022;20:120
18. Mulinacci G, Alonso GT, Snell-Bergeon JK, 
Shah VN. Glycemic outcomes with early initiation 
of continuous glucose monitoring system in 
recently diagnosed patients with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:6–10
19. Elbalshy M, Haszard J, Smith H, et al. Effect 
of divergent continuous glucose monitoring 
technologies on glycaemic control in type 1 
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis of randomised controlled trials. Diabet 
Med 2022;39:e14854
20. Champakanath A, Akturk HK, Alonso GT, 
Snell-Bergeon JK, Shah VN. Continuous glucose 
monitoring initiation within first year of type 1 
diabetes diagnosis is associated with improved 
glycemic outcomes: 7-year follow-up study. 
Diabetes Care 2022;45:750–753
21. Polonsky WH, Hessler D, Ruedy KJ, Beck RW; 
DIAMOND Study Group. The impact of continuous 
glucose monitoring on markers of quality of life in 
adults with type 1 diabetes: further findings from 
the DIAMOND randomized clinical trial. Diabetes 
Care 2017;40:736–741
22. Bergenstal RM, Klonoff DC, Garg SK, et al.; 
ASPIRE In-Home Study Group. Threshold-based 
insulin-pump interruption for reduction of hypo- 
glycemia. N Engl J Med 2013;369:224–232
23. Forlenza GP, Li Z, Buckingham BA, et al. 
Predictive low-glucose suspend reduces hypo- 
glycemia in adults, adolescents, and children with 
type 1 diabetes in an at-home randomized crossover 
study: results of the PROLOG trial. Diabetes Care 
2018;41:2155–2161
24. Brown SA, Kovatchev BP, Raghinaru D, et al.; 
iDCL Trial Research Group. Six-month randomized, 
multicenter trial of closed-loop control in type 1 
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:1707–1717
25. Collyns OJ, Meier RA, Betts ZL, et al. 
Improved glycemic outcomes with Medtronic 
S208 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
MiniMed advanced hybrid closed-loop delivery: 
results from a randomized crossover trial comparing 
automated insulin delivery with predictive low 
glucose suspend in people with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care 2021;44:969–975
26. Breton MD, Kovatchev BP. One year real-world 
use of the control-IQ advanced hybrid closed-loop 
technology. Diabetes Technol Ther 2021;23:601–608
27. Peacock S, Frizelle I, Hussain S. A systematic 
review of commercial hybrid closed-loop automated 
insulin delivery systems. Diabetes Ther 2023;14: 
839–855
28. Choudhary P, Kolassa R, Keuthage W, et al.; 
ADAPT study Group. Advanced hybrid closed loop 
therapy versus conventional treatment in adults with 
type 1 diabetes (ADAPT): a randomised controlled 
study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2022;10:720–731
29. Arunachalum S, Velado K, Vigersky RA, 
Cordero TL. Glycemic outcomes during real-world 
hybrid closed-loop system use by individuals with 
type 1 diabetes in the United States. J Diabetes 
Sci Technol 2023;17:951–958
30. Garg SK, Grunberger G, Weinstock R, et al.; 
Adult and Pediatric MiniMed HCL Outcomes 6- 
month RCT: HCL versus CSII Control Study Group. 
Improved glycemia with hybrid closed-loop versus 
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion therapy: 
results from a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes 
Technol Ther 2023;25:1–12
31. Russell SJ, Beck RW, Damiano ER, et al.; Bionic 
Pancreas Research Group. Multicenter, randomized 
trial of a bionic pancreas in type 1 diabetes. N Engl J 
Med 2022;387:1161–1172
32. Stahl-Pehe A, Shokri-Mashhadi N, Wirth M, et al. 
Efficacy of automated insulin delivery systems in 
people with type 1 diabetes: a systematic review and 
network meta-analysis of outpatient randomised 
controlled trials. EClinicalMedicine 2025;82:103190
33. Burnside MJ, Lewis DM, Crocket HR, et al. 
Open-source automated insulin delivery in type 1 
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2022;387:869–881
34. Burnside MJ, Lewis DM, Crocket HR, et al. 
Extended use of an open-source automated insulin 
delivery system in children and adults with type 1 
diabetes: the 24-week continuation phase following 
the CREATE randomized controlled trial. Diabetes 
Technol Ther 2023;25:250–259
35. Lepore G, Rossini A, Bellante R, et al. 
Switching to the Minimed 780G system achieves 
clinical targets for CGM in adults with type 1 diabetes 
regardless of previous insulin strategy and baseline 
glucose control. Acta Diabetol 2022;59:1309–1315
36. Matejko B, Juza A, Kiec-Wilk B, et al. 
Transitioning of people with type 1 diabetes from 
multiple daily injections and self-monitoring of blood 
glucose directly to MiniMed 780G advanced hybrid 
closed-loop system: a two-center, randomized, 
controlled study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2628–2635
37. Isganaitis E, Raghinaru D, Ambler-Osborn L, 
et al.; iDCL Trial Research Group. Closed-loop insulin 
therapy improves glycemic control in adolescents 
and young adults: outcomes from the international 
diabetes closed-loop trial. Diabetes Technol Ther 
2021;23:342–349
38. Forlenza GP, Carlson AL, Galindo RJ, et al. 
Real-world evidence supporting tandem control- 
IQ hybrid closed-loop success in the Medicare and 
Medicaid type 1 and type 2 diabetes populations. 
Diabetes Technol Ther 2022;24:814–823
39. Lal RA, Maahs DM. Optimizing basal insulin 
dosing. J Pediatr 2019;215:7–8
40. Mitsui Y, Kuroda A, Ishizu M, et al. Basal 
insulin requirement in patients with type 1 diabetes 
depends on the age and body mass index. J Diabetes 
Investig 2022;13:292–298
41. Castellano E, Attanasio R, Giagulli VA, et al.; 
Associazione Medici Endocrinologi (AME). The basal 
to total insulin ratio in outpatients with diabetes on 
basal-bolus regimen. J Diabetes Metab Disord 2018; 
17:393–399
42. Matejko B, Kukułka A, Kiec-Wilk B, Sta˛pór A, 
Klupa T, Malecki MT. Basal insulin dose in adults 
with type 1 diabetes mellitus on insulin pumps in 
real-life clinical practice: a single-center experience. 
Adv Med 2018;2018:1473160
43. King AB. Mean basal insulin dose is 0.2 U/kg/d 
at near normal glycaemia for type 1 or 2 diabetes on 
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion or once- 
nightly basal insulin. Diabetes Obesity Metabolism 
2021;23:866–869
44. Peters Al, Lafell L. The American Diabetes 
Association/JDRF Type 1 Diabetes Sourcebook. 
American Diabetes Association, 2013
45. Chiang JL, Kirkman MS, Laffel LMB, Peters AL, 
Type 1 Diabetes Sourcebook Authors. Type 1 diabetes 
through the life span: a position statement of the 
American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2014; 
37:2034–2054
46. Sämann A, Mühlhauser I, Bender R, Hunger- 
Dathe W, Kloos C, Müller UA. Flexible intensive 
insulin therapy in adults with type 1 diabetes and 
high risk for severe hypoglycemia and diabetic 
ketoacidosis. Diabetes Care 2006;29:2196–2199
47. Builes-Montaño CE, Ortiz-Cano NA, Ramirez- 
Rincón A, Rojas-Henao NA. Efficacy and safety of 
carbohydrate counting versus other forms of 
dietary advice in patients with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis 
of randomised clinical trials. J Hum Nutr Diet 
2022;35:1030–1042
48. Al Balwi R, Al Madani W, Al Ghamdi A. 
Efficacy of insulin dosing algorithms for high-fat 
high-protein mixed meals to control postprandial 
glycemic excursions in people living with type 1 
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:1635–1646
49. DAFNE Study Group. Training in flexible, 
intensive insulin management to enable dietary 
freedom in people with type 1 diabetes: Dose 
Adjustment For Normal Eating (DAFNE) randomised 
controlled trial. BMJ 2002;325:746
50. Hopkins D, Lawrence I, Mansell P, et al. Improved 
biomedical and psychological outcomes 1 year after 
structured education in flexible insulin therapy 
for people with type 1 diabetes: the U.K. DAFNE 
experience. Diabetes Care 2012;35:1638–1642
51. Speight J, Amiel SA, Bradley C, et al. Long- 
term biomedical and psychosocial outcomes following 
DAFNE (Dose Adjustment For Normal Eating) 
structured education to promote intensive insulin 
therapy in adults with sub-optimally controlled type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2010;89:22–29
52. Bruttomesso D, Boscari F, Lepore G, et al. A 
“slide rule” to adjust insulin dose using trend arrows 
in adults with type 1 diabetes: test in silico and in real 
life. Diabetes Ther 2021;12:1313–1324
53. Aleppo G, Laffel LM, Ahmann AJ, et al. A 
practical approach to using trend arrows on the 
Dexcom G5 CGM system for the management of 
adults with diabetes. J Endocr Soc 2017;1:1445–1460
54. Buckingham B, Xing D, Weinzimer S, et al.; 
Diabetes Research In Children Network (DirecNet) 
Study Group. Use of the DirecNet Applied Treatment 
Algorithm (DATA) for diabetes management with a 
real-time continuous glucose monitor (the FreeStyle 
Navigator). Pediatr Diabetes 2008;9:142–147
55. Parise M, Di Molfetta S, Graziano RT, et al. A 
head-to-head comparison of two algorithms for 
adjusting mealtime insulin doses based on CGM 
trend arrows in adult patients with type 1 diabetes: 
results from an exploratory study. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health 2023;20:3945
56. Petrovski G, Campbell J, Pasha M, et al. 
Simplified meal announcement versus precise 
carbohydrate counting in adolescents with type 1 
diabetes using the MiniMed 780G advanced 
hybrid closed loop system: a randomized controlled 
trial comparing glucose control. Diabetes Care 2023; 
46:544–550
57. Turrin KB, Trujillo JM. Effects of diabetes 
numeracy on glycemic control and diabetes self- 
management behaviors in patients on insulin pump 
therapy. Diabetes Ther 2019;10:1337–1346
58. White RO, Wolff K, Cavanaugh KL, Rothman 
R. Addressing health literacy and numeracy to 
improve diabetes education and care. Diabetes 
Spectr 2010;23:238–243
59. Sacks DB, Arnold M, Bakris GL, et al. Guidelines 
and recommendations for laboratory analysis in the 
diagnosis and management of diabetes mellitus. 
Diabetes Care 2023;46:e151–e199
60. Klonoff DC, Berard L, Franco DR, et al. Advance 
insulin injection technique and education with FITTER 
forward expert recommendations. Mayo Clin Proc 
2025;100:682–699
61. Bergenstal RM, Strock ES, Peremislov D, 
Gibney MA, Parvu V, Hirsch LJ. Safety and efficacy 
of insulin therapy delivered via a 4mm pen needle in 
obese patients with diabetes. Mayo Clin Proc 2015; 
90:329–338
62. Qiao Y-C, Ling W, Pan Y-H, et al. Efficacy and 
safety of pramlintide injection adjunct to insulin 
therapy in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Oncotarget 
2017;8:66504–66515
63. Meng H, Zhang A, Liang Y, Hao J, Zhang X, Lu 
J. Effect of metformin on glycaemic control in 
patients with type 1 diabetes: a meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Metab Res 
Rev 2018;34:e2983
64. Petrie JR, Chaturvedi N, Ford I, et al.; 
REMOVAL Study Group. Cardiovascular and metabolic 
effects of metformin in patients with type 1 diabetes 
(REMOVAL): a double-blind, randomised, placebo- 
controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5: 
597–609
65. Mathieu C, Zinman B, Hemmingsson JU, et 
al.; ADJUNCT ONE Investigators. Efficacy and 
safety of liraglutide added to insulin treatment in 
type 1 diabetes: the ADJUNCT ONE treat-to-target 
randomized trial. Diabetes Care 2016;39:1702–1710
66. Ahrén B, Hirsch IB, Pieber TR, et al.; ADJUNCT 
TWO Investigators. Efficacy and safety of liraglutide 
added to capped insulin treatment in subjects with 
type 1 diabetes: the ADJUNCT TWO randomized trial. 
Diabetes Care 2016;39:1693–1701
67. von Herrath M, Bain SC, Bode B, et al.; Anti- 
IL-21–liraglutide Study Group investigators and 
contributors. Anti-interleukin-21 antibody and 
liraglutide for the preservation of β-cell function in 
adults with recent-onset type 1 diabetes: a 
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 
2 trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2021;9:212–224
68. Garg SK, Kaur G, Haider Z, Rodriquez E, Beatson 
C, Snell-Bergeon J. Efficacy of semaglutide in over- 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S209 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
weight and obese patients with type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetes Technol Ther 2024;26:184–189
69. Garg SK, Akturk HK, Kaur G, Beatson C, Snell- 
Bergeon J. Efficacy and safety of tirzepatide in 
overweight and obese adult patients with type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2024;26:367–374
70. Pasqua M-R, Tsoukas MA, Kobayati A, 
Aboznadah W, Jafar A, Haidar A. Subcutaneous 
weekly semaglutide with automated insulin delivery 
in type 1 diabetes: a double-blind, randomized, 
crossover trial. Nat Med 2025;31:1239–1245
71. Akturk HK, Dong F, Snell-Bergeon JK, 
Karakus KE, Shah VN. Efficacy and safety of 
tirzepatide in adults with type 1 diabetes: a proof 
of concept observational study. J Diabetes Sci 
Technol 2025;19:292–296
72. Shah VN, Akturk HK, Kruger D, et al. 
Semaglutide in adults with type 1 diabetes and 
obesity. NEJM Evid 2025;4:EVIDoa2500173
73. National Library of Medicine. National Center for 
Biotechnology Information. ClinicalTrials.gov. Type 1 
Diabetes Impacts of Semaglutide on Cardiovascular 
Outcomes (T1-DISCO) (NCT05819138). Accessed 23 
August 2025. Available from https://clinicaltrials.gov/ 
study/NCT05819138?tab=results
74. National Library of Medicine. National Center 
for Biotechnology Information. ClinicalTrials.gov. Trial 
of Semaglutide for Diabetic Kidney Disease in Type 1 
Diabetes (RT1D) (NCT05822609). Accessed 20 August 
2025. Available from https://www.clinicaltrials. 
gov/study/NCT05822609
75. National Library of Medicine. National Center 
for Biotechnology Information. ClinicalTrials.gov. 
Alleviating Carbohydrate Counting for Patients with 
Type-1 Diabetes Using a Closed Loop System with 
Weekly Subcutaneous Semaglutide (SEMA SMA) 
(NCT06387199). Accessed 20 August 2025. Available 
from https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06387199
76. National Library of Medicine. National Center 
for Biotechnology Information. ClinicalTrials.gov. 
Obesity Complicating Type 1 Diabetes: GLP-1 
Analogue Anti-obesity Treatment (NCT06411210). 
Accessed 20 August 2025. Available from https:// 
clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06411210
77. Rao L, Ren C, Luo S, Huang C, Li X. Sodium- 
glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors as an add-on 
therapy to insulin for type 1 diabetes mellitus: 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Acta Diabetol 2021;58:869–880
78. Li M, Liu Z, Yang X, et al. The effect of 
sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors as an 
adjunct to insulin in patients with type 1 diabetes 
assessed by continuous glucose monitoring: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Diabetes 
Complications 2023;37:108632
79. Chen M-B, Xu R-J, Zheng Q-H, Zheng X-W, 
Wang H. Efficacy and safety of sotagliflozin adjuvant 
therapy for type 1 diabetes mellitus: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 
2020;99:e20875
80. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA 
Introductory Remarks: January 17, 2019: 
Endocrinologic and Metabolic Drugs Advisory 
Committee Meeting. 2019. Accessed 25 August 
2025. Available from https://wayback.archive-it.org/ 
7993/20190207212714/https://www.fda.gov/ 
downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeeting 
Materials/Drugs/EndocrinologicandMetabolicDrugs 
AdvisoryCommittee/UCM629782.pdf
81. Bhatt DL, Szarek M, Steg PG, et al.; SOLOIST- 
WHF Trial Investigators. Sotagliflozin in patients 
with diabetes and recent worsening heart failure. 
N Engl J Med 2021;384:117–128
82. Bhatt DL, Szarek M, Pitt B, et al.; SCORED 
Investigators. Sotagliflozin in patients with diabetes 
and chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 2021;384: 
129–139
83. Danne T, Garg S, Peters AL, et al. International 
consensus on risk management of diabetic 
ketoacidosis in patients with type 1 diabetes treated 
with sodium-glucose cotransporter (SGLT) inhibitors. 
Diabetes Care 2019;42:1147–1154
84. Herold KC, Bundy BN, Long SA, et al.; Type 1 
Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. An anti-CD3 antibody, 
teplizumab, in relatives at risk for type 1 diabetes. N 
Engl J Med 2019;381:603–613
85. Lachin JM, McGee P, Palmer JP; DCCT/EDIC 
Research Group. Impact of C-peptide preservation on 
metabolic and clinical outcomes in the Diabetes 
Control and Complications Trial. Diabetes 2014;63: 
739–748
86. Kosheleva L, Koshelev D, Lagunas-Rangel FA, 
Levit S, Rabinovitch A, Schiöth HB. Disease-modifying 
pharmacological treatments of type 1 diabetes: 
molecular mechanisms, target checkpoints, and 
possible combinatorial treatments. Pharmacol Rev 
2025;77:100044
87. Dean PG, Kukla A, Stegall MD, Kudva YC. 
Pancreas transplantation. BMJ 2017;357:j1321
88. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Lantidra. 
Accessed 25 August 2025. Available from https:// 
www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/lantidra
89. Geta ET, Terefa DR, Hailu WB, et al. 
Effectiveness of shared decision-making for glycaemic 
control among type 2 diabetes mellitus adult patients: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 
2024;19:e0306296
90. Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al. 
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 
2022. A consensus report by the American Diabetes 
Association (ADA) and the European Association for 
the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 2022;45: 
2753–2786
91. Lingvay I, Sumithran P, Cohen RV, Le Roux CW. 
Obesity management as a primary treatment goal for 
type 2 diabetes: time to reframe the conversation. 
Lancet 2022;399:394–405
92. Wing RR, Lang W, Wadden TA, et al.; Look 
AHEAD Research Group. Benefits of modest weight 
loss in improving cardiovascular risk factors in 
overweight and obese individuals with type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1481–1486
93. Adler AI, Coleman RL, Leal J, Whiteley WN, 
Clarke P, Holman RR. Post-trial monitoring of a 
randomised controlled trial of intensive glycaemic 
control in type 2 diabetes extended from 10 years to 
24 years (UKPDS 91). Lancet 2024;404:145–155
94. Kunutsor SK, Balasubramanian VG, Zaccardi 
F, et al. Glycaemic control and macrovascular and 
microvascular outcomes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis of trials investigating intensive 
glucose-lowering strategies in people with type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2024;26:2069–2081
95. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, Matthews 
DR, Neil HAW. 10-year follow-up of intensive 
glucose control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 
2008;359:1577–1589
96. Bahardoust M, Mousavi S, Yariali M, et al. Effect 
of metformin (vs. placebo or sulfonylurea) on all- 
cause and cardiovascular mortality and incident 
cardiovascular events in patients with diabetes: an 
umbrella review of systematic reviews with meta- 
analysis. J Diabetes Metab Disord 2024;23:27–38
97. Maruthur NM, Tseng E, Hutfless S, et al. 
Diabetes medications as monotherapy or metformin- 
based combination therapy for type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern 
Med 2016;164:740–751
98. Karagiannis T, Paschos P, Paletas K, 
Matthews DR, Tsapas A. Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 
inhibitors for treatment of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus in the clinical setting: systematic review 
and meta-analysis. BMJ 2012;344:e1369
99. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. FDA Drug 
Safety Communication: FDA revises warnings 
regarding use of the diabetes medicine metformin in 
certain patients with reduced kidney function. 
Accessed 25 August 2025. Available from https:// 
www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda- 
drug-safety-communication-fda-revises-warnings- 
regarding-use-diabetes-medicine-metformin-certain
100. Salpeter SR, Greyber E, Pasternak GA, 
Salpeter EE. Risk of fatal and nonfatal lactic acidosis 
with metformin use in type 2 diabetes mellitus: 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Intern 
Med 2003;163:2594–2602
101. Salpeter SR, Greyber E, Pasternak GA, Salpeter 
EE. Risk of fatal and nonfatal lactic acidosis with 
metformin use in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2010;2010:CD002967
102. Lipska KJ, Bailey CJ, Inzucchi SE. Use of 
metformin in the setting of mild-to-moderate renal 
insufficiency. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1431–1437
103. Out M, Kooy A, Lehert P, Schalkwijk CA, 
Stehouwer CDA. Long-term treatment with metformin 
in type 2 diabetes and methylmalonic acid: post hoc 
analysis of a randomized controlled 4.3year trial. 
J Diabetes Complications 2018;32:171–178
104. Aroda VR, Edelstein SL, Goldberg RB, et al.; 
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. 
Long-term metformin use and vitamin B12 deficiency 
in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016;101:1754–1761
105. Frías JP, Davies MJ, Rosenstock J, et al.; 
SURPASS-2 Investigators. Tirzepatide versus 
semaglutide once weekly in patients with type 2 
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2021;385:503–515
106. Sorli C, Harashima S-I, Tsoukas GM, et al. 
Efficacy and safety of once-weekly semaglutide 
monotherapy versus placebo in patients with 
type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 1): a double-blind, 
randomised, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, 
multinational, multicentre phase 3a trial. Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:251–260
107. Tsapas A, Avgerinos I, Karagiannis T, et al. 
Comparative effectiveness of glucose-lowering 
drugs for type 2 diabetes: a systematic review 
and network meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2020; 
173:278–286
108. Nathan DM, Lachin JM, Balasubramanyam 
A, et al.; GRADE Study Research Group. Glycemia 
reduction in type 2 diabetes - glycemic outcomes. N 
Engl J Med 2022;387:1063–1074
109. Babu A, Mehta A, Guerrero P, et al. Safe 
and simple emergency department discharge therapy 
for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and severe 
hyperglycemia. Endocr Pract 2009;15:696–704
110. Buse JB, Peters A, Russell-Jones D, et al. Is insulin 
the most effective injectable antihyperglycaemic 
therapy? Diabetes Obes Metab 2015;17:145–151
111. D’Alessio D, Häring H-U, Charbonnel B, et 
al.; EAGLE Investigators. Comparison of insulin 
glargine and liraglutide added to oral agents in 
patients with poorly controlled type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2015;17:170–178
S210 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
112. Cahn A, Cefalu WT. Clinical considerations 
for use of initial combination therapy in type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2016;39(Suppl. 2):S137–S145
113. Abdul-Ghani MA, Puckett C, Triplitt C, et al. 
Initial combination therapy with metformin, 
pioglitazone and exenatide is more effective than 
sequential add-on therapy in subjects with new- 
onset diabetes. Results from the Efficacy and 
Durability of Initial Combination Therapy for 
Type 2 Diabetes (EDICT): a randomized trial. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2015;17:268–275
114. Cai X, Gao X, Yang W, Han X, Ji L. Efficacy 
and safety of initial combination therapy in treatment- 
naïve type 2 diabetes patients: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Diabetes Ther 2018;9:1995–2014
115. Aroda VR, González-Galvez G, Grøn R, et al. 
Durability of insulin degludec plus liraglutide versus 
insulin glargine U100 as initial injectable therapy in 
type 2 diabetes (DUAL VIII): a multicentre, open-label, 
phase 3b, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes 
Endocrinol 2019;7:596–605
116. Khunti K, Davies MJ. Clinical inertia-time to 
reappraise the terminology? Prim Care Diabetes 
2017;11:105–106
117. Bennett WL, Maruthur NM, Singh S, et al. 
Comparative effectiveness and safety of medications 
for type 2 diabetes: an update including new drugs 
and 2-drug combinations. Ann Intern Med 2011;154: 
602–613
118. Maloney A, Rosenstock J, Fonseca V. A 
model-based meta-analysis of 24 antihyperglycemic 
drugs for type 2 diabetes: comparison of treatment 
effects at therapeutic doses. Clin Pharmacol Ther 
2019;105:1213–1223
119. Lajthia E, Bucheit JD, Nadpara PA, et al. 
Combination therapy with once-weekly glucagon 
like peptide-1 receptor agonists and dipeptidyl 
peptidase-4 inhibitors in type 2 diabetes: a case 
series. Pharm Pract (Granada) 2019;17:1588
120. Violante R, Oliveira JHA, Yoon K-H, et al. A 
randomized non-inferiority study comparing the 
addition of exenatide twice daily to sitagliptin or 
switching from sitagliptin to exenatide twice daily 
in patients with type 2 diabetes experiencing 
inadequate glycaemic control on metformin and 
sitagliptin. Diabet Med 2012;29:e417–e424
121. Nauck MA, Kahle M, Baranov O, Deacon 
CF, Holst JJ. Addition of a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 
inhibitor, sitagliptin, to ongoing therapy with the 
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist liraglutide: a 
randomized controlled trial in patients with type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab 2017;19:200–207
122. Pratley R, Amod A, Hoff ST, et al.; PIONEER 4 
investigators. Oral semaglutide versus subcutaneous 
liraglutide and placebo in type 2 diabetes (PIONEER 
4): a randomised, double-blind, phase 3a trial. Lancet 
2019;394:39–50
123. Del Prato S, Kahn SE, Pavo I, et al.; 
SURPASS-4 Investigators. Tirzepatide versus 
insulin glargine in type 2 diabetes and increased 
cardiovascular risk (SURPASS-4): a randomised, 
open-label, parallel-group, multicentre, phase 3 
trial. Lancet 2021;398:1811–1824
124. Singh S, Wright EE, Kwan AYM, et al. Glucagon- 
like peptide-1 receptor agonists compared with basal 
insulins for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes 
Obes Metab 2017;19:228–238
125. Levin PA, Nguyen H, Wittbrodt ET, Kim SC. 
Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists: a systematic 
review of comparative effectiveness research. Diabetes 
Metab Syndr Obes 2017;10:123–139
126. Abd El Aziz MS, Kahle M, Meier JJ, Nauck 
MA. A meta-analysis comparing clinical effects of short- 
or long-acting GLP-1 receptor agonists versus insulin 
treatment from head-to-head studies in type 2 diabetic 
patients. Diabetes Obes Metab 2017;19:216–227
127. Giorgino F, Benroubi M, Sun J-H, Zimmermann 
AG, Pechtner V. Efficacy and safety of once-weekly 
dulaglutide versus insulin glargine in patients with 
type 2 diabetes on metformin and glimepiride 
(AWARD-2). Diabetes Care 2015;38:2241–2249
128. Aroda VR, Bain SC, Cariou B, et al. Efficacy 
and safety of once-weekly semaglutide versus once- 
daily insulin glargine as add-on to metformin (with or 
without sulfonylureas) in insulin-naive patients with 
type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 4): a randomised, open- 
label, parallel-group, multicentre, multinational, phase 
3a trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;5:355–366
129. Davies M, Heller S, Sreenan S, et al. Once- 
weekly exenatide versus once- or twice-daily 
insulin detemir. Diabetes Care 2013;36:1368–1376
130. Diamant M, Van Gaal L, Stranks S, et al. 
Once weekly exenatide compared with insulin 
glargine titrated to target in patients with type 2 
diabetes (DURATION-3): an open-label randomised 
trial. Lancet 2010;375:2234–2243
131. Dahl D, Onishi Y, Norwood P, et al. Effect of 
subcutaneous tirzepatide vs placebo added to 
titrated insulin glargine on glycemic control in 
patients with type 2 diabetes: the SURPASS-5 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2022;327:534–545
132. Packer M, Zile MR, Kramer CM, et al.; 
SUMMIT Trial Study Group. Tirzepatide for heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction and 
obesity. N Engl J Med 2025;392:427–437
133. Kosiborod MN, Petrie MC, Borlaug BA, et 
al.; STEP-HFpEF DM Trial Committees and 
Investigators. Semaglutide in patients with 
obesity-related heart failure and type 2 diabetes. 
N Engl J Med 2024;390:1394–1407
134. Pratley RE, Tuttle KR, Rossing P, et al.; 
FLOW Trial Committees and Investigators. Effects 
of semaglutide on heart failure outcomes in 
diabetes and chronic kidney disease in the FLOW 
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2024;84:1615–1628
135. Kosiborod MN, Deanfield J, Pratley R, et al.; 
SELECT, FLOW, STEP-HFpEF, and STEP-HFpEF DM 
Trial Committees and Investigators. Semaglutide 
versus placebo in patients with heart failure and 
mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction: a 
pooled analysis of the SELECT, FLOW, STEP- 
HFpEF, and STEP-HFpEF DM randomised trials. 
Lancet 2024;404:949–961
136. McCoy RG, Lipska KJ, Van Houten HK, Shah 
ND. Association of cumulative multimorbidity, 
glycemic control, and medication use with 
hypoglycemia-related emergency department 
visits and hospitalizations among adults with 
diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2020;3:e1919099
137. Nathan DM, Lachin JM, Bebu I, et al.; 
GRADE Study Research Group. Glycemia reduction in 
type 2 diabetes - microvascular and cardiovascular 
outcomes. N Engl J Med 2022;387:1075–1088
138. McCoy RG, Herrin J, Swarna KS, et al. 
Effectiveness of glucose-lowering medications on 
cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 
diabetes at moderate cardiovascular risk. Nat 
Cardiovasc Res 2024;3:431–440
139. Berg DD, Wiviott SD, Scirica BM, et al. Heart 
failure risk stratification and efficacy of sodium- 
glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors in patients with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Circulation 2019;140: 
1569–1577
140. Kidney Disease: improving Global Outcomes 
Diabetes Work Group. KDIGO 2022 clinical practice 
guideline for diabetes management in chronic 
kidney disease. Kidney Int 2022;102:S1–S127
141. Kristensen SL, Rørth R, Jhund PS, et al. 
Cardiovascular, mortality, and kidney outcomes 
with GLP-1 receptor agonists in patients with 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis of cardiovascular outcome trials. Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:776–785
142. Perkovic V, Tuttle KR, Rossing P, et al.; 
FLOW Trial Committees and Investigators. Effects 
of semaglutide on chronic kidney disease in patients 
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2024;391: 
109–121
143. Heerspink HJL, Sattar N, Pavo I, et al. 
Effects of tirzepatide versus insulin glargine on 
kidney outcomes in type 2 diabetes in the 
SURPASS-4 trial: post-hoc analysis of an open- 
label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet Diabetes 
Endocrinol 2022;10:774–785
144. Heerspink HJL, Friedman AN, Bjornstad P, et al. 
Kidney parameters with tirzepatide in obesity with or 
without type 2 diabetes. J Am Soc Nephrol 2025; 
36:2190–2200
145. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Exenatide 
extended-release prescribing information. Accessed 
20 September 2025. Available from https:// 
www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2018/ 
022200s026lbl.pdf
146. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Lixisenatide 
prescribing information. Accessed 20 September 
2025. Available from https://products.sanofi.us/ 
soliqua100-33/soliqua100-33.pdf
147. Scheen AJ. Pharmacokinetics and clinical 
use of incretin-based therapies in patients with 
chronic kidney disease and type 2 diabetes. Clin 
Pharmacokinet 2015;54:1–21
148. McGuire DK, Shih WJ, Cosentino F, et al. 
Association of SGLT2 inhibitors with cardiovascular 
and kidney outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes: 
a meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol 2021;6:148–158
149. Reyes-Farias CI, Reategui-Diaz M, Romani- 
Romani F, Prokop L. The effect of sodium-glucose 
cotransporter 2 inhibitors in patients with chronic 
kidney disease with or without type 2 diabetes 
mellitus on cardiovascular and renal outcomes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 
2023;18:e0295059
150. Herrington WG, Staplin N, Wanner C, et al.; 
The Empa-Kidney Collaborative Group. Empagliflozin 
in patients with chronic kidney disease. N Engl J Med 
2023;388:117–127
151. Perkovic V, Jardine MJ, Neal B, et al.; 
CREDENCE Trial Investigators. Canagliflozin and renal 
outcomes in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy. 
N Engl J Med 2019;380:2295–2306
152. Dagogo-Jack S, Pratley RE, Cherney DZI, et 
al. Glycemic efficacy and safety of the SGLT2 
inhibitor ertugliflozin in patients with type 2 
diabetes and stage 3 chronic kidney disease: an 
analysis from the VERTIS CV randomized trial. 
BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care 2021;9:e002484
153. Cherney DZI, Cooper ME, Tikkanen I, et al. 
Pooled analysis of phase III trials indicate contrasting 
influences of renal function on blood pressure, body 
weight, and HbA1c reductions with empagliflozin. 
Kidney Int 2018;93:231–244
154. Wexler DJ, de Boer IH, Ghosh A, et al.; 
GRADE Research Group. Comparative effects of 
glucose-lowering medications on kidney outcomes in 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S211 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
type 2 diabetes: the GRADE randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Intern Med 2023;183:705–714
155. Belfort R, Harrison SA, Brown K, et al. A 
placebo-controlled trial of pioglitazone in subjects 
with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 
2006;355:2297–2307
156. Sanyal AJ, Newsome PN, Kliers I, et al.; 
ESSENCE Study Group. Phase 3 trial of semaglutide in 
metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis. N 
Engl J Med 2025;392:2089–2099
157. Newsome PN, Buchholtz K, Cusi K, et al.; 
NN9931-4296 Investigators. A placebo-controlled 
trial of subcutaneous semaglutide in nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med 2021;384:1113–1124
158. Loomba R, Hartman ML, Lawitz EJ, et al.; 
SYNERGY-NASH Investigators. Tirzepatide for metabolic 
dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis with liver 
fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2024;391:299–310
159. Gastaldelli A, Cusi K, Fernández Landó L, 
Bray R, Brouwers B, Rodríguez A. Effect of 
tirzepatide versus insulin degludec on liver fat 
content and abdominal adipose tissue in people 
with type 2 diabetes (SURPASS-3 MRI): a substudy 
of the randomised, open-label, parallel-group, 
phase 3 SURPASS-3 trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 
2022;10:393–406
160. Armstrong MJ, Gaunt P, Aithal GP, et al.; LEAN 
trial team. Liraglutide safety and efficacy in patients 
with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (LEAN): a 
multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo- 
controlled phase 2 study. Lancet 2016;387:679–690
161. Sathyanarayana P, Jogi M, Muthupillai R, 
Krishnamurthy R, Samson SL, Bajaj M. Effects of 
combined exenatide and pioglitazone therapy on 
hepatic fat content in type 2 diabetes. Obesity 
(Silver Spring) 2011;19:2310–2315
162. Abdul-Ghani M, Migahid O, Megahed A, 
DeFronzo RA, Al-Ozairi E, Jayyousi A. Combination 
therapy with pioglitazone/exenatide improves beta- 
cell function and produces superior glycaemic control 
compared with basal/bolus insulin in poorly controlled 
type 2 diabetes: a 3-year follow-up of the Qatar study. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:2287–2294
163. Lavynenko O, Abdul-Ghani M, Alatrach M, 
et al. Combination therapy with pioglitazone/ 
exenatide/metformin reduces the prevalence of 
hepatic fibrosis and steatosis: the efficacy and 
durability of initial combination therapy for type 2 
diabetes (EDICT). Diabetes Obes Metab 2022;24: 
899–907
164. Garvey WT, Frias JP, Jastreboff AM, et al.; 
SURMOUNT-2 investigators. Tirzepatide once 
weekly for the treatment of obesity in people with 
type 2 diabetes (SURMOUNT-2): a double-blind, 
randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 
3 trial. Lancet 2023;402:613–626
165. Davies M, Færch L, Jeppesen OK, et al.; 
STEP 2 Study Group. Semaglutide 2·4 mg once a 
week in adults with overweight or obesity, and 
type 2 diabetes (STEP 2): a randomised, double- 
blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled, phase 
3 trial. Lancet 2021;397:971–984
166. Bonora E, Frias JP, Tinahones FJ, et al. Effect 
of dulaglutide 3.0 and 4.5 mg on weight in patients 
with type 2 diabetes: exploratory analyses of AWARD- 
11. Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2242–2250
167. Davies MJ, Bergenstal R, Bode B, et al.; 
NN8022-1922 Study Group. Efficacy of liraglutide 
for weight loss among patients with type 2 
diabetes: the SCALE diabetes randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA 2015;314:687–699
168. Ahmann AJ, Capehorn M, Charpentier G, et al. 
Efficacy and safety of once-weekly semaglutide versus 
exenatide er in subjects with type 2 diabetes (SUSTAIN 
3): a 56-week, open-label, randomized clinical trial. 
Diabetes Care 2018;41:258–266
169. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, et al.; 
STAMPEDE Investigators. Bariatric surgery versus 
intensive medical therapy for diabetes - 5-year 
outcomes. N Engl J Med 2017;376:641–651
170. Blonde L, Merilainen M, Karwe V, Raskin P, 
TITRATE Study Group. Patient-directed titration for 
achieving glycaemic goals using a once-daily basal 
insulin analogue: an assessment of two different 
fasting plasma glucose targets - the TITRATE study. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2009;11:623–631
171. Lucidi P, Candeloro P, Cioli P, et al. 
Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic head- 
to-head comparison of clinical, equivalent doses 
of insulin glargine 300 units · mL1 and insulin 
degludec 100 units·mL1 in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 
Care 2021;44:125–132
172. Wang Z, Hedrington MS, Gogitidze Joy N, et al. 
Dose-response effects of insulin glargine in type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1555–1560
173. Semlitsch T, Engler J, Siebenhofer A, Jeitler K, 
Berghold A, Horvath K. (Ultra-)long-acting insulin 
analogues versus NPH insulin (human isophane 
insulin) for adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;11:CD005613
174. Mannucci E, Caiulo C, Naletto L, Madama 
G, Monami M. Efficacy and safety of different 
basal and prandial insulin analogues for the 
treatment of type 2 diabetes: a network meta- 
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Endocrine 
2021;74:508–517
175. Russell-Jones D, Gall M-A, Niemeyer M, 
Diamant M, Del Prato S. Insulin degludec results 
in lower rates of nocturnal hypoglycaemia and 
fasting plasma glucose vs. insulin glargine: a 
meta-analysis of seven clinical trials. Nutr Metab 
Cardiovasc Dis 2015;25:898–905
176. Mehta R, Goldenberg R, Katselnik D, Kuritzky L. 
Practical guidance on the initiation, titration, and 
switching of basal insulins: a narrative review for 
primary care. Ann Med 2021;53:998–1009
177. Cowart K. Overbasalization: addressing 
hesitancy in treatment intensification beyond 
basal insulin. Clin Diabetes 2020;38:304–310
178. Maiorino MI, Chiodini P, Bellastella G, et al. 
The good companions: insulin and glucagon-like 
peptide-1 receptor agonist in type 2 diabetes. A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2019;154: 
101–115
179. Rodbard HW, Visco VE, Andersen H, Hiort 
LC, Shu DHW. Treatment intensification with 
stepwise addition of prandial insulin aspart boluses 
compared with full basal-bolus therapy (FullSTEP 
Study): a randomised, treat-to-target clinical trial. 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014;2:30–37
180. McCall AL. Insulin therapy and hypoglycemia. 
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2012;41:57–87
181. Fullerton B, Siebenhofer A, Jeitler K, et al. 
Short-acting insulin analogues versus regular 
human insulin for adult, non-pregnant persons 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2018;12:CD013228
182. de la Peña A, Riddle M, Morrow LA, et al. 
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
high-dose human regular U-500 insulin versus 
human regular U-100 insulin in healthy obese 
subjects. Diabetes Care 2011;34:2496–2501
183. Hood RC, Borra S, Fan L, Pollom RD, Huang 
A, Chen J. Treatment patterns and outcomes, before 
and after humulin R U-500 initiation, among high- 
dose type 2 diabetes mellitus patients in the United 
States. Endocr Pract 2021;27:798–806
184. Becker RHA, Dahmen R, Bergmann K, 
Lehmann A, Jax T, Heise T. New insulin glargine 
300 units · mL1 provides a more even activity 
profile and prolonged glycemic control at steady 
state compared with insulin glargine 100 units · 
mL1. Diabetes Care 2015;38:637–643
185. Riddle MC, Yki-Järvinen H, Bolli GB, et al. 
One-year sustained glycaemic control and less 
hypoglycaemia with new insulin glargine 300 
U/ml compared with 100 U/ml in people with 
type 2 diabetes using basal plus meal-time 
insulin: the EDITION 1 12-month randomized 
trial, including 6-month extension. Diabetes 
Obes Metab 2015;17:835–842
186. Yki-Järvinen H, Bergenstal R, Ziemen M, 
et al. New insulin glargine 300 units/mL versus 
glargine 100 units/mL in people with type 2 
diabetes using oral agents and basal insulin: 
glucose control and hypoglycemia in a 6-month 
randomized controlled trial (EDITION 2). Diabetes 
Care 2014;37:3235–3243
187. Korsatko S, Deller S, Koehler G, et al. A 
comparison of the steady-state pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic profiles of 100 and 200 
U/mL formulations of ultra-long-acting insulin 
degludec. Clin Drug Investig 2013;33:515–521
188. de la Peña A, Seger M, Soon D, et al. Bio- 
equivalence and comparative pharmacodyna- 
mics of insulin lispro 200 U/mL relative to insulin 
lispro (Humalog) 100U/mL. Clin Pharmacol Drug 
Dev 2016;5:69–75
189. Gentile S, Fusco A, Colarusso S, et al. A 
randomized, open-label, comparative, crossover 
trial on preference, efficacy, and safety profiles of 
lispro insulin u-100 versus concentrated lispro 
insulin u-200 in patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: a possible contribution to greater treatment 
adherence. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2018;17:445–450
190. Grant M, Heise T, Baughman R. Comparison of 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of inhaled 
technosphere insulin and subcutaneous insulin lispro 
in the treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus. Clin 
Pharmacokinet 2022;61:413–422
191. Akturk HK, Snell-Bergeon JK, Rewers A, 
et al. Improved postprandial glucose with 
inhaled technosphere insulin compared with 
insulin aspart in patients with type 1 diabetes 
on multiple daily injections: the STAT study. 
Diabetes Technol Ther 2018;20:639–647
192. Hoogwerf BJ, Pantalone KM, Basina M, Jones 
MC, Grant M, Kendall DM. Results of a 24-week trial 
of Technosphere insulin versus insulin aspart in 
type 2 diabetes. Endocr Pract 2021;27:38–43
193. Price DA, Deng Q, Kipnes M, Beck SE. 
Episodic real-time CGM use in adults with type 2 
diabetes: results of a pilot randomized controlled 
trial. Diabetes Ther 2021;12:2089–2099
194. Chesser H, Srinivasan S, Puckett C, 
Gitelman SE, Wong JC. Real-time continuous 
glucose monitoring in adolescents and young 
adults with type 2 diabetes can improve quality 
of life. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2024;18:911–919
195. Martens TW, Willis HJ, Bergenstal RM, Kruger 
DF, Karslioglu-French E, Steenkamp DW. A rando- 
mized controlled trial using continuous glucose 
monitoring to guide food choices and diabetes 
S212 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
self-care in people with type 2 diabetes not taking 
insulin. Diabetes Technol Ther 2025;27:261–270
196. Battelino T, Lalic N, Hussain S, et al. The use 
of continuous glucose monitoring in people living 
with obesity, intermediate hyperglycemia or type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2025;223:112111
197. Aronson R, Brown RE, Chu L, et al. Impact 
of flash glucose monitoring in people with type 2 
diabetes inadequately controlled with non- 
insulin antihyperglycaemic therapy (IMMEDIATE): a 
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 
2023;25:1024–1031
198. Moon SJ, Kim K-S, Lee WJ, Lee MY, Vigersky 
R, Park C-Y. Efficacy of intermittent short-term 
use of a real-time continuous glucose monitoring 
system in non-insulin-treated patients with type 2 
diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes 
Obes Metab 2023;25:110–120
199. Martens T, Beck RW, Bailey R, et al.; 
MOBILE Study Group. Effect of continuous 
glucose monitoring on glycemic control in patients 
with type 2 diabetes treated with basal insulin: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2021;325:2262–2272
200. Agarwal S, Varghese RT, Savian R, Low 
Wang CC, Galindo RJ. Moving beyond glycated 
hemoglobin to glucose patterns: newer indications 
for continuous glucose monitor use. Endocr Pract 
2025;31:1046–1053
201. van Dijk P, Bouma A, Landman GW, et al. 
Hypoglycemia in frail elderly patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus treated with sulfonylurea. J 
Diabetes Sci Technol 2017;11:438–439
202. Tamborlane WV, Beck RW, Bode BW, et al.; 
Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation Continuous 
Glucose Monitoring Study Group. Continuous 
glucose monitoring and intensive treatment of type 1 
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;359:1464–1476
203. Hansen KW, Bibby BM. The frequency of 
intermittently scanned glucose and diurnal variation 
of glycemic metrics. J Diabetes Sci Technol 2022;16: 
1461–1465
204. Urakami T, Yoshida K, Kuwabara R, et al. 
Frequent scanning using flash glucose monitoring 
contributes to better glycemic control in children 
and adolescents with type 1 diabetes. J Diabetes 
Investig 2022;13:185–190
205. Laffel LM, Kanapka LG, Beck RW, et al.; 
CGM Intervention in Teens and Young Adults with 
T1D (CITY) Study Group. Effect of continuous glucose 
monitoring on glycemic control in adolescents and 
young adults with type 1 diabetes: a randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA 2020;323:2388–2396
206. New JP, Ajjan R, Pfeiffer AFH, Freckmann G. 
Continuous glucose monitoring in people with 
diabetes: the randomized controlled Glucose 
Level Awareness in Diabetes Study (GLADIS). 
Diabet Med 2015;32:609–617
207. Gubitosi-Klug RA, Braffett BH, Bebu I, et al. 
Continuous glucose monitoring in adults with type 1 
diabetes with 35 years duration from the DCCT/EDIC 
study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:659–665
208. Teo E, Hassan N, Tam W, Koh S. Effectiveness 
of continuous glucose monitoring in maintaining 
glycaemic control among people with type 1 
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review of randomised 
controlled trials and meta-analysis. Diabetologia 
2022;65:604–619
209. Seidu S, Kunutsor SK, Ajjan RA, Choudhary 
P. Efficacy and safety of continuous glucose 
monitoring and intermittently scanned continuous 
glucose monitoring in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of interventional 
evidence. Diabetes Care 2024;47:169-179
210. Phillip M, Nimri R, Bergenstal RM, et al. 
Consensus recommendations for the use of 
automated insulin delivery technologies in clinical 
practice. Endocr Rev 2023;44:254–280
211. Brown SA, Beck RW, Raghinaru D, et al.; 
iDCL Trial Research Group. Glycemic outcomes of 
use of CLC versus PLGS in type 1 diabetes: a 
randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2020; 
43:1822–1828
212. Pasquel FJ, Davis GM, Huffman DM, et al.; 
Omnipod 5 SECURE-T2D Consortium. Automated 
insulin delivery in adults with type 2 diabetes: a 
nonrandomized clinical trial. JAMA Netw Open 
2025;8:e2459348
213. Bhargava A, Bergenstal RM, Warren ML, et al.; 
IMPACT2D Study Group. Safety and effectiveness of 
MiniMedTM 780G advanced hybrid closed-loop 
insulin intensification in adults with insulin-requiring 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther 2025;27: 
366–375
214. Davis GM, Peters AL, Bode BW, et al. Safety 
and efficacy of the Omnipod 5 automated insulin 
delivery system in adults with type 2 diabetes: 
from injections to hybrid closed-loop therapy. 
Diabetes Care 2023;46:742–750
215. Kudva YC, Raghinaru D, Lum JW, et al.; 2IQP 
Study Group. A randomized trial of automated 
insulin delivery in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 
2025;392:1801–1812
216. Valentine V, Newswanger B, Prestrelski S, 
Andre AD, Garibaldi M. Human factors usability and 
validation studies of a glucagon autoinjector in a 
simulated severe hypoglycemia rescue situation. 
Diabetes Technol Ther 2019;21:522–530
217. Settles JA, Gerety GF, Spaepen E, Suico JG, 
Child CJ. Nasal glucagon delivery is more successful 
than injectable delivery: a simulated severe 
hypoglycemia rescue. Endocr Pract 2020;26:407–415
218. Herges JR, Galindo RJ, Neumiller JJ, Heien HC, 
Umpierrez GE, McCoy RG. Glucagon prescribing and 
costs among U.S. adults with diabetes, 2011-2021. 
Diabetes Care 2023;46:620–627
219. Kahn PA, Liu S, McCoy R, Gabbay RA, Lipska K. 
Glucagon use by U.S. adults with type 1 and type 2 
diabetes. J Diabetes Complications 2021;35:107882
220. Benning TJ, Heien HC, Herges JR, Creo AL, 
Al Nofal A, McCoy RG. Glucagon fill rates and cost 
among children and adolescents with type 1 
diabetes in the United States, 2011–2021. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;206:111026
221. Riddle MC, Herman WH. The cost of 
diabetes care-an elephant in the room. Diabetes 
Care 2018;41:929–932
222. Merative. Redbook (electronic version). 
Accessed 15 July 2025. Available from https:// 
www.micromedexsolutions.com
223. Data.Medicaid.gov. NADAC (National Average 
Drug Acquisition Cost). Accessed 15 July 2025. Available 
from https://healthdata.gov/dataset/NADAC-National- 
Average-Drug-Acquisition-Cost-2024/3tha-57c6/about 
_data
224. Kang H, Lobo JM, Kim S, Sohn M-W. Cost- 
related medication non-adherence among U.S. 
adults with diabetes. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 
2018;143:24–33
225. Patel MR, Piette JD, Resnicow K, Kowalski- 
Dobson T, Heisler M. Social determinants of health, 
cost-related nonadherence, and cost-reducing 
behaviors among adults with diabetes: findings from 
the National Health Interview Survey. Med Care 
2016;54:796–803
226. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Part 
D Senior Savings Model. Accessed 25 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.cms.gov/priorities/ 
innovation/innovation-models/part-d-savings-model
227. Baig KA, Fry CE, Buntin MB, Powers AC, 
Dusetzina SB. Insulin out-of-pocket spending caps 
and employer-sponsored insurance: changes in 
out-of-pocket and total costs for insulin and 
healthcare. Health Serv Res 2025:e14656
228. American Diabetes Association. State Insulin 
Copay Caps. Accessed 25 August 2025. Available 
from https://diabetes.org/tools-resources/affordable 
-insulin/state-insulin-copay-caps
229. Suran M. All 3 major insulin manufacturers are 
cutting their prices-here’s what the news means for 
patients with diabetes. JAMA 2023;329:1337–1339
230. Herges JR, Neumiller JJ, McCoy RG. Easing 
the financial burden of diabetes management: a 
guide for patients and primary care clinicians. 
Clin Diabetes 2021;39:427–436
231. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. FDA Drug 
Shortages. Accessed 17 August 2025. Available 
from https://dps.fda.gov/drugshortages
232. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Drug 
Compounding and Drug Shortages. Accessed 
25 August 2025. Available from https://www.fda 
.gov/drugs/human-drug-compounding/drug- 
compounding-and-drug-shortages
233. Ashraf AR, Mackey TK, Schmidt J, et al. 
Safety and risk assessment of no-prescription 
online semaglutide purchases. JAMA Netw Open 
2024;7:e2428280
234. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. FDA alerts 
health care providers, compounders and patients of 
dosing errors associated with compounded injectable 
semaglutide products. Accessed 25 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.fda.gov/drugs/human 
-drug-compounding/fda-alerts-health-care-providers 
-compounders-and-patients-dosing-errors-associated 
-compounded
235. Lambson JE, Flegal SC, Johnson AR. Admin- 
istration errors of compounded semaglutide reported 
to a poison control center-case series. J Am Pharm 
Assoc (2003) 2023;63:1643–1645
236. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. FDA 
warns consumers not to use counterfeit Ozempic 
(semaglutide) found in U.S. drug supply chain. 
Accessed 25 August 2025. Available from https:// 
www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/ 
fda-warns-consumers-not-use-counterfeit-ozempic 
-semaglutide-found-us-drug-supply-chain
237. Neumiller JJ, Bajaj M, Bannuru RR, et al. 
Compounded GLP-1 and dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor 
agonists: a statement from the American Diabetes 
Association. Diabetes Care 2025;48:177–181
238. Whitley HP, Trujillo JM, Neumiller JJ. Special 
report: potential strategies for addressing GLP-1 
and dual GLP-1/GIP Receptor agonist shortages. 
Clin Diabetes 2023;41:467–473
239. Urva S, Coskun T, Loghin C, et al. The novel 
dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide 
and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist 
tirzepatide transiently delays gastric emptying 
similarly to selective long-acting GLP-1 receptor 
agonists. Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:1886–1891
240. Skelley JW, Swearengin K, York AL, Glover LH. 
The impact of tirzepatide and glucagon-like peptide 1 
receptor agonists on oral hormonal contraception. J 
Am Pharm Assoc (2003) 2024;64:204–211.e4 e204
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S213 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
241. National Library of Medicine. National Center 
for Biotechnology Information. ClinicalTrials.gov. A 
Study of the Effect of Tirzepatide on How the Body 
Handles Birth Control Pills in Healthy Female 
Participants (NCT04172987). Accessed 12 June 
2024. Available from https://clinicaltrials.gov/ 
study/NCT04172987
242. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Tirzepatide 
prescribing information. Accessed 25 August 2025. 
Available from https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/ 
drugsatfda_docs/label/2022/215866s000lbl.pdf
243. Chang L-S, Barroso-Sousa R, Tolaney SM, 
Hodi FS, Kaiser UB, Min L. Endocrine toxicity of cancer 
immunotherapy targeting immune checkpoints. 
Endocr Rev 2019;40:17–65
244. Zhou L, Yang S, Li Y, Xue C, Wan R. A 
comprehensive review of immune checkpoint 
inhibitor-related diabetes mellitus: incidence, clinical 
features, management, and prognosis. Front Immunol  
2024;15:1448728
245. Barroso-Sousa R, Barry WT, Garrido-Castro 
AC, et al. Incidence of endocrine dysfunction 
following the use of different immune checkpoint 
inhibitor regimens: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol 2018;4:173–182
246. Liu J, Zhou H, Zhang Y, et al. Reporting of 
immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy-associated 
diabetes, 2015–2019. Diabetes Care 2020;43: 
e79–e80
247. Mulla K, Farag S, Moore B, et al. 
Hyperglycaemia following immune checkpoint 
inhibitor therapy-Incidence, aetiology and assessment. 
Diabet Med 2023;40:e15053
248. Byun DJ, Braunstein R, Flynn J, et al. 
Immune checkpoint inhibitor-associated diabetes: a 
single-institution experience. Diabetes Care 2020;43: 
3106–3109
249. Schneider BJ, Naidoo J, Santomasso BD, et 
al. Management of immune-related adverse 
events in patients treated with immune checkpoint 
inhibitor therapy: ASCO guideline update. J Clin Oncol 
2021;39:4073–4126
250. Goncalves MD, Hopkins BD, Cantley LC. 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, growth disorders, 
and cancer. N Engl J Med 2018;379:2052–2062
251. André F, Ciruelos E, Rubovszky G, et al.; 
SOLAR-1 Study Group. Alpelisib for PIK3CA- 
mutated, hormone receptor-positive advanced 
breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2019;380:1929–1940
252. André F, Ciruelos EM, Juric D, et al. Alpelisib 
plus fulvestrant for PIK3CA-mutated, hormone 
receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor 
receptor-2-negative advanced breast cancer: final 
overall survival results from SOLAR-1. Ann Oncol 
2021;32:208–217
253. Rugo HS, André F, Yamashita T, et al. Time 
course and management of key adverse events 
during the randomized phase III SOLAR-1 study of 
PI3K inhibitor alpelisib plus fulvestrant in patients 
with HR-positive advanced breast cancer. Ann 
Oncol 2020;31:1001–1010
254. Jhaveri KL, Im S-A, Saura C, et al. Overall 
survival with inavolisib in PIK3CA-mutated advanced 
breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2025;393:151–161
255. Liu D, Weintraub MA, Garcia C, et al. 
Characterization, management, and risk factors 
of hyperglycemia during PI3K or AKT inhibitor 
treatment. Cancer Med 2022;11:1796–1804
256. Gallagher EJ, Moore H, Lacouture ME, et al. 
Managing hyperglycemia and rash associated with 
alpelisib: expert consensus recommendations using 
the Delphi technique. NPJ Breast Cancer 2024;10:12
257. Ihle NT, Lemos R, Schwartz D, et al. Peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonist 
pioglitazone prevents the hyperglycemia caused by 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway inhibition by 
PX-866 without affecting antitumor activity. Mol 
Cancer Ther 2009;8:94–100
258. Borrego MR, Lu Y-S, Reyes-Cosmelli F, et al. 
SGLT2 inhibition improves PI3Kα inhibitor- 
induced hyperglycemia: findings from preclinical 
animal models and from patients in the BYLieve 
and SOLAR-1 trials. Breast Cancer Res Treat 
2024;208:111–121
259. Goncalves MD, Farooki A. Management of 
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase inhibitor-associated 
hyperglycemia. Integr Cancer Ther 2022;21: 
15347354211073163
260. Cheung Y-MM, McDonnell M, Hamnvik O-PR. 
A targeted approach to phosphoinositide-3-kinase/ 
Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin-induced 
hyperglycemia. Curr Probl Cancer 2022;46:100776
261. Khan KH, Wong M, Rihawi K, et al. 
Hyperglycemia and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/ 
protein kinase b/mammalian target of rapamycin 
(PI3K/AKT/mTOR) inhibitors in phase I trials: 
incidence, predictive factors, and management. 
Oncologist 2016;21:855–860
262. Busaidy NL, Farooki A, Dowlati A, et al. 
Management of metabolic effects associated 
with anticancer agents targeting the PI3K-Akt- 
mTOR pathway. J Clin Oncol 2012;30:2919–2928
263. Nowak KM, Rdzanek-Pikus M, Romanowska- 
Próchnicka K, Nowakowska-Płaza A, Papierska L. High 
prevalence of steroid-induced glucose intolerance 
with normal fasting glycaemia during low-dose 
glucocorticoid therapy: an oral glucose tolerance 
test screening study. Rheumatology (Oxford) 
2021;60:2842–2851
264. Kulkarni S, Durham H, Glover L, et al. Metabolic 
adverse events associated with systemic corticosteroid 
therapy-a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 
Open 2022;12:e061476
265. Perez A, Jansen-Chaparro S, Saigi I, Bernal-Lopez 
MR, Miñambres I, Gomez-Huelgas R. Glucocorticoid- 
induced hyperglycemia. J Diabetes 2014;6:9–20
266. Elena C, Chiara M, Angelica B, et al. 
Hyperglycemia and diabetes induced by glucocorticoids 
in nondiabetic and diabetic patients: revision of 
literature and personal considerations. Curr Pharm 
Biotechnol 2018;19:1210–1220
267. Burt MG, Roberts GW, Aguilar-Loza NR, 
Frith P, Stranks SN. Continuous monitoring of 
circadian glycemic patterns in patients receiving 
prednisolone for COPD. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2011;96:1789–1796
268. Zhang F, Karam JG. Glycemic profile of 
intravenous dexamethasone-induced hyperglycemia 
using continuous glucose monitoring. Am J Case Rep 
2021;22:e930733
269. Wallace MD, Metzger NL. Optimizing the 
treatment of steroid-induced hyperglycemia. Ann 
Pharmacother 2018;52:86–90
270. Limbachia V, Nunney I, Page DJ, et al. The 
effect of different types of oral or intravenous 
corticosteroids on capillary blood glucose levels 
in hospitalized inpatients with and without 
diabetes. Clin Ther 2024;46:e59–e63
271. Limbachia V, Nunney I, Page DJ, et al. 
Differential effects of oral versus intravenous 
hydrocortisone and dexamethasone on capillary 
blood glucose levels in adult inpatients - a single 
centre study. Clin Med (Lond) 2024;24:100249
272. Roberts A, James J, Dhatariya K, Joint British 
Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient Care. 
Management of hyperglycaemia and steroid 
(glucocorticoid) therapy: a guideline from the 
Joint British Diabetes Societies (JBDS) for Inpatient 
Care group. Diabet Med 2018;35:1011–1017
273. Gerards MC, de Maar JS, Steenbruggen TG, 
Hoekstra JBL, Vriesendorp TM, Gerdes VEA. Add-on 
treatment with intermediate-acting insulin versus 
sliding-scale insulin for patients with type 2 diabetes 
or insulin resistance during cyclic glucocorticoid- 
containing antineoplastic chemotherapy: a 
randomized crossover study. Diabetes Obes Metab 
2016;18:1041–1044
274. Burt MG, Drake SM, Aguilar-Loza NR, Esterman 
A, Stranks SN, Roberts GW. Efficacy of a basal bolus 
insulin protocol to treat prednisolone-induced 
hyperglycaemia in hospitalised patients. Intern 
Med J 2015;45:261–266
275. Joharatnam-Hogan N, Chambers P, Dhatariya 
K, Board R; Joint British Diabetes Society for Inpatient 
Care (JBDS), UK Chemotherapy Board (UKCB). A 
guideline for the outpatient management of 
glycaemic control in people with cancer. Diabet 
Med 2022;39:e14636
276. Türk T, Pietruck F, Dolff S, et al. Repaglinide 
in the management of new-onset diabetes mellitus 
after renal transplantation. Am J Transplant 2006;6: 
842–846
277. Ode KL, Ballman M, Battezzati A, et al. 
ISPAD clinical practice consensus guidelines 2022: 
management of cystic fibrosis-related diabetes in 
children and adolescents. Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23: 
1212–1228
278. Kurnikowski A, Nordheim E, Schwaiger E, et 
al. Criteria for prediabetes and posttransplant 
diabetes mellitus after kidney transplantation: a 
2-year diagnostic accuracy study of participants 
from a randomized controlled trial. Am J Transplant 
2022;22:2880–2891
279. Sharif A, Chakkera H, de Vries APJ, et al. 
International consensus on post-transplantation 
diabetes mellitus. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2024;39: 
531–549
280. Kuningas K, Driscoll J, Mair R, et al. 
Comparing glycaemic benefits of active versus 
passive lifestyle intervention in kidney allograft 
recipients: a randomized controlled trial. 
Transplantation 2020;104:1491–1499
281. Hecking M, Haidinger M, Döller D, et al. 
Early basal insulin therapy decreases new-onset 
diabetes after renal transplantation. J Am Soc 
Nephrol 2012;23:739–749
282. Schwaiger E, Krenn S, Kurnikowski A, et al. 
Early postoperative basal insulin therapy versus 
standard of care for the prevention of diabetes mellitus 
after kidney transplantation: a multicenter randomized 
trial. J Am Soc Nephrol 2021;32:2083–2098
283. Chandra A, Rao N, Pooniya V, Singh A. 
Hypoglycemia with insulin in post-transplant diabetes 
mellitus. Transpl Immunol 2023;78:101833
284. Tuerk TR, Bandur S, Nuernberger J, et al. 
Gliquidone therapy of new-onset diabetes 
mellitus after kidney transplantation. Clin Nephrol 
2008;70:26–32
285. Lo C, Toyama T, Oshima M, et al. Glucose- 
lowering agents for treating pre-existing and 
new-onset diabetes in kidney transplant recipients. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;8:CD009966
286. Lawrence SE, Chandran MM, Park JM, et al. 
Sweet and simple as syrup: a review and guidance 
for use of novel antihyperglycemic agents for 
S214 
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment                                                  
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
post-transplant diabetes mellitus and type 2 
diabetes mellitus after kidney transplantation. 
Clin Transplant 2023;37:e14922
287. Munoz Pena JM, Cusi K. Posttransplant 
diabetes mellitus: recent developments in 
pharmacological management of hyperglycemia. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2023;109:e1–e11
288. Ram E, Lavee J, Tenenbaum A, et al. 
Metformin therapy in patients with diabetes mellitus 
is associated with a reduced risk of vasculopathy and 
cardiovascular mortality after heart transplantation. 
Cardiovasc Diabetol 2019;18:118
289. Vest LS, Koraishy FM, Zhang Z, et al. 
Metformin use in the first year after kidney 
transplant, correlates, and associated outcomes 
in diabetic transplant recipients: a retrospective 
analysis of integrated registry and pharmacy 
claims data. Clin Transplant 2018;32:e13302
290. Abdelaziz TS, Ali AY, Fatthy M. Efficacy and 
safety of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors in kidney 
transplant recipients with post-transplant diabetes 
mellitus (PTDM)- a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Curr Diabetes Rev 2020;16:580–585
291. Thangavelu T, Lyden E, Shivaswamy V. A 
retrospective study of glucagon-like peptide 1 
receptor agonists for the management of diabetes 
after transplantation. Diabetes Ther 2020;11: 
987–994
292. Kukla A, Hill J, Merzkani M, et al. The use of 
GLP1R agonists for the treatment of type 2 
diabetes in kidney transplant recipients. Transplant 
Direct 2020;6:e524
293. Singh P, Pesavento TE, Washburn K, Walsh 
D, Meng S. Largest single-centre experience of 
dulaglutide for management of diabetes mellitus 
in solid organ transplant recipients. Diabetes 
Obes Metab 2019;21:1061–1065
294. Liou J-H, Liu Y-M, Chen C-H. Management of 
diabetes mellitus with glucagonlike peptide-1 agonist 
liraglutide in renal transplant recipients: a retrospective 
study. Transplant Proc 2018;50:2502–2505
295. Vigara LA, Villanego F, Orellana C, et al. 
Effectiveness and safety of glucagon-like peptide-1 
receptor agonist in a cohort of kidney transplant 
recipients. Clin Transplant 2022;36:e14633
296. Sweiss H, Hall R, Zeilmann D, et al. Single- 
center evaluation of safety & efficacy of glucagon-like 
peptide-1 receptor agonists in solid organ 
transplantation. Prog Transplant 2022;32:357–362
297. Zelada H, Campana M, Kawai K, et al. 
Efficacy, tolerability, and safety of glucagon-like 
peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP1-RA) in kidney 
transplant recipients with diabetes. Clin Transplant 
2025;39:e70144
298. Kim HS, Lee J, Jung CH, Park J-Y, Lee WJ. 
Dulaglutide as an effective replacement for prandial 
insulin in kidney transplant recipients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus: a retrospective review. Diabetes 
Metab J 2021;45:948–953
299. Orandi BJ, Chen Y, Li Y, et al. GLP-1 receptor 
agonists in kidney transplant recipients with pre- 
existing diabetes: a retrospective cohort study. 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2025;13:374–383
300. Lin L-C, Chen J-Y, Huang TT-M, Wu V-C. 
Association of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor 
agonists with cardiovascular and kidney outcomes 
in type 2 diabetic kidney transplant recipients. 
Cardiovasc Diabetol 2025;24:87
301. Diker Cohen T, Rudman Y, Turjeman A, et al. 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists and renal 
outcomes in kidney transplant recipients with 
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Metab 2025;51:101624
302. Dotan I, Rudman Y, Turjeman A, et al. 
Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists and 
cardiovascular outcomes in solid organ transplant 
recipients with diabetes mellitus. Transplantation 
2024;108:e121–e128
303. Sammour Y, Nassif M, Magwire M, et al. 
Effects of GLP-1 receptor agonists and SGLT-2 
inhibitors in heart transplant patients with type 2 
diabetes: initial report from a cardiometabolic 
center of excellence. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2021;40:426–429
304. Lim J-H, Kwon S, Jeon Y, et al. The efficacy and 
safety of SGLT2 inhibitor in diabetic kidney transplant 
recipients. Transplantation 2022;106:e404–e412
305. Schwaiger E, Burghart L, Signorini L, et al. 
Empagliflozin in posttransplantation diabetes 
mellitus: a prospective, interventional pilot study 
on glucose metabolism, fluid volume, and patient 
safety. Am J Transplant 2019;19:907–919
306. Halden TAS, Kvitne KE, Midtvedt K, et al. 
Efficacy and safety of empagliflozin in renal 
transplant recipients with posttransplant diabetes 
mellitus. Diabetes Care 2019;42:1067–1074
307. Mahling M, Schork A, Nadalin S, Fritsche A, 
Heyne N, Guthoff M. Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 
(SGLT2) inhibition in kidney transplant recipients 
with diabetes mellitus. Kidney Blood Press Res 
2019;44:984–992
308. Shah M, Virani Z, Rajput P, Shah B. Efficacy 
and safety of canagliflozin in kidney transplant 
patients. Indian J Nephrol 2019;29:278–281
309. Sánchez Fructuoso AI, Bedia Raba A, Banegas 
Deras E, et al. Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 
inhibitor therapy in kidney transplant patients 
with type 2 or post-transplant diabetes: an 
observational multicentre study. Clin Kidney J 
2023;16:1022–1034
310. Greeley SAW, Polak M, Njølstad PR, et al. 
ISPAD clinical practice consensus guidelines 2022: 
the diagnosis and management of monogenic 
diabetes in children and adolescents. Pediatr 
Diabetes 2022;23:1188–1211
311. Christensen AS, Hædersdal S, Støy J, et al. 
Efficacy and safety of glimepiride with or without 
linagliptin treatment in patients with HNF1A 
diabetes (maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
type 3): a randomized, double-blinded, placebo- 
controlled, crossover trial (GLIMLINA). Diabetes 
Care 2020;43:2025–2033
312. Umpierrez GE, Davis GM, ElSayed NA, et al. 
Hyperglycemic crises in adults with diabetes: a 
consensus report. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1257–1275
313. Wolfsdorf JI, Ratner RE. SGLT inhibitors for 
type 1 diabetes: proceed with extreme caution. 
Diabetes Care 2019;42:991–993
314. Colacci M, Fralick J, Odutayo A, Fralick M. 
Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors and 
risk of diabetic ketoacidosis among adults with 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Can J Diabetes 2022;46:10–15.e2
315. Bonora BM, Avogaro A, Fadini GP. Sodium- 
glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors and diabetic 
ketoacidosis: an updated review of the literature. 
Diabetes Obes Metab 2018;20:25–33
316. Blau JE, Tella SH, Taylor SI, Rother KI. 
Ketoacidosis associated with SGLT2 inhibitor 
treatment: analysis of FAERS data. Diabetes 
Metab Res Rev 2017;33:10.1002/dmrr.2924
317. Tsapas A, Karagiannis T, Kakotrichi P, et al. 
Comparative efficacy of glucose-lowering medications 
on body weight and blood pressure in patients 
with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and 
network meta-analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab 
2021;23:2116–2124
318. Davies MJ, D’Alessio DA, Fradkin J, et al. 
Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 
2018. A consensus report by the American Diabetes 
Association (ADA) and the European Association for 
the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care 2018; 
41:2669–2701
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                      
Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic Treatment
S215 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S183/848878/dc26s009.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
