SUMMARY OF REVISIONS
Summary of Revisions: Standards 
of Care in Diabetes—2026
Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S6–S12 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SREV
American Diabetes Association 
Professional Practice Committee for 
Diabetes*
*A complete list of members of the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes can be found at https://doi
.org/10.2337/dc26-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each contributor is available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee for Diabetes. Summary of revisions: Standards of Care in Diabetes— 
2026. Diabetes Care 2026;49(Suppl. 1):S6–S12
© 2025 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this work for educational, noncommercial purposes if properly cited and 
unaltered. The version of record may be linked at https://diabetesjournals.org/care, but ADA permission is required to post this work on any 
third-party site or platform. This publication and its contents may not be reproduced, distributed, or used for text or data mining, machine 
learning, or similar technologies without prior written permission. Requests to reuse, adapt, or distribute this work may be sent to permissions@ 
diabetes.org. More information is available at https://diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.
GENERAL CHANGES
The field of diabetes care is rapidly 
changing as new research, technology, 
and treatments that can improve the 
health and well-being of people with 
diabetes continue to emerge. With an­
nual updates since 1989, the American 
Diabetes Association has long been a 
leader in producing guidelines that cap­
ture the most current state of the field.
The 2026 “Standards of Care in Diabetes” 
has continued to incorporate person-first 
and inclusive language. Efforts were made 
to consistently apply terminology that 
empowers people with diabetes and rec­
ognizes the individual at the center of di­
abetes care. Minor updates were made 
to figures and tables to align with current 
accessibility standards.
Although levels of evidence for sev­
eral recommendations have been up­
dated, these changes are not outlined 
below where the clinical recommen­
dation has remained the same. That 
is, changes in evidence level from, for 
example, E to C, are not noted below. 
The 2026 Standards of Care contains, 
in addition to many minor changes that 
clarify recommendations or reflect new 
evidence, more substantive revisions 
detailed below.
SECTION CHANGES
Endorsements
For the third consecutive year, the 
“Bone Heath” subsection in section 4, 
“Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and 
Assessment of Comorbidities,” received 
endorsement from the American Society 
for Bone and Mineral Research and sec­
tion 8, “Obesity and Weight Management 
for the Prevention of Diabetes,” received 
endorsement from The Obesity Soci­
ety. For the eighth consecutive year, 
section 10, “Cardiovascular Disease and 
Risk Management,” received endorse­
ment from the American College of 
Cardiology. For the second consecutive 
year, section 13, “Older Adults,” re­
ceived endorsement from the American 
Geriatrics Society. For the first time, sec­
tion 11, “Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk 
Management,” and section 14, “Children 
and Adolescent,” received endorsement 
from the National Kidney Foundation and 
the International Society for Pediatric and 
Adolescent Diabetes, respectively.
1. Improving Care and Promoting
Health in Populations
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S001)
Recommendation 1.1 was revised to high­
light the importance of shared decision- 
making based on individual values,
preferences, prognoses, comorbidities, 
and informed financial considerations.
Recommendation 1.5 was updated to 
emphasize the importance of continu­
ous quality improvement by health sys­
tems to improve quality of care and 
health outcomes.
Recommendation 1.8 was revised to 
include consideration of digital self- 
management tools or coaches as appro­
priate to provide support for people with 
diabetes.
Recommendation 1.9 was modified to 
highlight the important role of community 
health workers in supporting the man­
agement of kidney disease risk factors, 
in addition to diabetes and cardiovascu­
lar disease risk factors, in underserved 
communities and health care systems.
Table 1.1 was enhanced to specify 
additional care team members whose ex­
pertise may be beneficial for older adults 
with diabetes.
2. Diagnosis and Classification of
Diabetes
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S002)
Recommendation 2.8 was divided into 
two components to emphasize the
importance of prompt evaluation for 
stage 3, overt type 1 diabetes in people 
with one or more islet autoantibodies 
S6
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S6/848824/dc26srev.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
(Recommendation 2.8a); Recommenda­
tion 2.8b maintains the original guidance 
that people with multiple islet autoanti­
bodies should be referred to a specialized 
center for education and possibly preven­
tative interventions.
Recommendation 2.9 was added to 
highlight that people with a confirmed 
single IA-2 autoantibody should be mon­
itored similarly to people with stage 2 
type 1 diabetes but negative for IA-2 
autoantibodies, as they have a compara­
ble risk of progression to stage 3.
Recommendation 2.18 was added to 
reinforce monitoring of postprandial or 
random plasma glucose in the setting of 
recurrent or long-term treatment with 
glucocorticoids.
Recommendation 2.19 was added to 
underscore the role of counseling and 
education regarding the risk of hypergly­
cemia in people initiating treatment with 
immune checkpoint inhibitors, phosphoino­
sitidylinositol 3-kinase α (PI3Kα) inhibitors, 
and other anticancer therapy medications.
Recommendation 2.20 was added to 
provide guidance regarding plasma glu­
cose monitoring at each visit in people 
treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors.
Recommendation 2.21 was added to 
emphasize close monitoring of plasma glu­
cose in people initiating treatment with 
PI3Kα inhibitors, which are associated with 
a particularly high risk of hyperglycemia 
during the first weeks of treatment.
Recommendation 2.22 was added to 
prompt fasting or random plasma glu­
cose monitoring at each visit in people 
treated with mammalian target of rapa­
mycin (mTOR) inhibitors.
Recommendation 2.24a was updated 
to reiterate that, when feasible, an an­
nual oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) 
starting at the age of 10 years is the pre­
ferred screening test for cystic fibrosis–
related diabetes.
Recommendation 2.24b was modified 
to highlight that A1C can be used as a 
part of an alternative two-step screen­
ing strategy for cystic fibrosis–related di­
abetes when OGTT is not feasible.
Previous Recommendations 2.26b and 
2.26c on gestational diabetes mellitus 
screening were consolidated and up­
dated and are now Recommendation 
2.31b; the associated narrative text 
was moved to section 15, “Diabetes 
Management in Pregnancy,” and up­
dated to reflect recent evidence and 
controversies in the management of 
early abnormal glucose metabolism in 
pregnancy. The text in the “Gestational 
Diabetes Mellitus” subsection was up­
dated and more closely integrated with 
the information in section 15, “Diabetes 
Management in Pregnancy.”
3. Prevention or Delay of Diabetes 
and Associated Comorbidities
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S003)
Recommendation 3.1 was broadened to 
include monitoring of progression from 
prediabetes to all types of diabetes, not 
only type 2 diabetes.
Recommendation 3.2 was enhanced 
to include consideration of continuous 
glucose monitoring (CGM) data when 
monitoring for disease progression among 
individuals with presymptomatic type 1 
diabetes.
Recommendation 3.3 was clarified to 
recommend referral of individuals with 
overweight or obesity at high risk for 
type 2 diabetes to a diabetes preven­
tion program with the goal of achieving 
and maintaining weight reduction of at 
least 5–7% of initial body weight.
Recommendation 3.4 was revised to 
focus on eating patterns with the stron­
gest evidence base for preventing type 2 
diabetes, including Mediterranean and low 
carbohydrate eating patterns.
Recommendation 3.6 was clarified to 
indicate that certified technology-assisted 
diabetes prevention programs can be de­
livered through smartphones, web-based 
applications, and telehealth modalities.
Recommendation 3.8 was added to rec­
ommend considering using metformin to 
prevent hyperglycemia in high-risk indi­
viduals treated with a PI3Kα inhibitor (e.g., 
alpelisib and inavolisib).
Recommendation 3.9 was added to rec­
ommend considering using metformin to 
prevent hyperglycemia in high-risk individu­
als treated with high-dose glucocorticoids.
4. Comprehensive Medical Evaluation 
and Assessment of Comorbidities
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S004)
Recommendation 4.3 was changed to in­
clude assessment for glycemic status 
and previous and current treatment at 
the initial visit and follow-up visits as 
appropriate. Support systems and avail­
able resources were added in addition 
to identifying care partners at the initial 
visit and follow-up visits as appropriate.
Recommendation 4.5, regarding vaccina­
tions, was revised to include adolescents.
Recommendation 4.13a was revised 
to recommend considering osteoporosis 
drug therapy in older adults with increased 
risk of fracture with a T-score ≤−2.5, and 
Recommendation 4.13b was added to 
state that treatment may be considered 
in adults with diabetes with a T-score 
between −2.0 and −2.5 in the presence 
of additional fracture risk.
Recommendation 4.26 was updated to 
specify that a glucagon-like peptide 1 recep­
tor agonist (GLP-1 RA) with demonstrated 
benefits in metabolic dysfunction–associated 
steatohepatitis (MASH) can be considered 
for treatment in adults with type 2 diabe­
tes, metabolic dysfunction–associated stea­
totic liver disease (MASLD), and overweight 
or obesity.
Recommendation 4.27a was updated 
to specify that a GLP-1 RA with demon­
strated benefit is preferred for glycemic 
management due to beneficial effects 
on MASH in adults with type 2 diabetes 
and biopsy-proven MASH or those at 
high risk for liver fibrosis.
In Fig. 4.1, MASLD was added to be 
considered as a specific factor that im­
pacts choice of treatment.
Figure 4.2 was modified to clarify that 
the algorithm for individuals with fibrosis-4 
(FIB-4) index >2.67 should be managed by 
a liver specialist.
Figure 4.3 was modified to include a 
GLP-1 RA with demonstrated benefit for 
MASH pharmacotherapy in individuals 
with MASLD and high risk for MASH.
5. Facilitating Positive Health 
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve 
Health Outcomes
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S005)
Recommendation 5.4 was revised to 
recommend using behavioral strategies 
to support diabetes self-management 
education and support (DSMES) and en­
gagement in positive health behaviors.
Recommendation 5.5 was modified 
to state that DSMES should be culturally 
and socially appropriate based on per­
sonal preferences and needs and that 
DSMES participation should be commu­
nicated with the diabetes care team.
Recommendation 5.12 was revised to 
advise that an overweight or obesity treat­
ment plan including nutrition, physical ac­
tivity, and behavioral health support should 
be provided to aim for at least 5–7% 
weight loss from baseline body weight.
Recommendation 5.23 was amended 
to recommend counseling and regular 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                                                            
Summary of Revisions
S7 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S6/848824/dc26srev.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
monitoring for individuals pursuing in­
tentional weight loss on adequate nutri­
tion intake.
Recommendation 5.32 was modified 
to state that the updated comprehen­
sive prefasting risk assessment should 
be used to generate a risk score for the 
safety of religious fasting.
Recommendation 5.34 was modified 
to encourage increases in physical activity 
levels with the goal of meeting activity 
guidelines, and the narrative discussion 
on the role of physical activity during 
obesity treatment was updated.
Recommendation 5.40 was revised to 
recommend routine assessment and avoid­
ance of tobacco and e-cigarette/vaping 
use. It also suggests providing or referring 
individuals for combination treatment, 
which includes tobacco and e-cigarette/ 
vaping cessation counseling and pharma­
cologic therapy.
Recommendation 5.45 was updated 
to recommend referral to a qualified 
behavioral health professional if diabe­
tes distress is not adequately addressed 
during the medical appointment.
Recommendation 5.46 was updated to 
recommend screening for anxiety symptoms 
at least annually in people with diabetes 
and encourage health care professionals to 
address anxiety symptoms within their 
scope of practice.
Recommendation 5.47 was updated to 
recommend screening individuals at high 
risk for hypoglycemia or with severe or fre­
quent hypoglycemia for fear of hypoglycemia 
at least annually or when clinically appropri­
ate and to refer to a trained health care pro­
fessional for evidence-based intervention.
Recommendation 5.56 was amended 
to recommend screening for sleep health 
in people with diabetes and in those at 
risk for diabetes.
Table 5.3 now contains updated cri­
teria for the comprehensive prefasting 
risk assessment for people with diabe­
tes who seek to fast during Ramadan.
6. Glycemic Goals, Hypoglycemia, 
and Hyperglycemic Crises
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S006)
Recommendation 6.17 was added to pro­
mote inclusion of oral glucose in first aid 
kits for use in treating hypoglycemia in 
workplaces, schools, and other institu­
tions and public settings.
The section “Intercurrent Illness” was 
expanded to include criteria for holding 
specific diabetes medication classes dur­
ing acute illness.
The section “Hyperglycemic Crises: Di­
agnosis, Management, and Prevention” 
was revised to include more content on 
the outpatient prevention and manage­
ment of diabetic ketoacidosis. Reflecting 
this expanded content, “Hyperglycemic 
Crises” was added to the section title.
Figure 6.1, which shows an individu­
alized approach to setting glycemic goals, 
was expanded to include individual­
ized goals for CGM metrics based on 
health status and other person- and 
treatment-specific factors.
7. Diabetes Technology
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S007)
Recommendations were added regard­
ing education and training of people with 
diabetes and health care professionals 
based on the type of device. In the narra­
tive text, more details were added about 
education and training based on the type 
of device. Major updates include content 
about the support health care professionals 
may need and information about device 
initiation for different types of diabetes.
Recommendation 7.3 was divided into 
two recommendations and includes guid­
ance regarding prescribing and initiating 
device use. Recommendation 7.3a dis­
cusses prescribing, initiating, and follow­
ing a CGM device, and Recommendation 
7.3b describes the same aspects for auto­
mated insulin delivery (AID) systems.
Recommendation 7.6 was changed to 
specify children and adolescents in a school 
setting and states that children and adoles­
cents should be supported at school in the 
use of diabetes technology, such as CGM 
systems, continuous subcutaneous insulin 
infusion (CSII), connected insulin pens, 
and AID systems. Older students (aged 
≥18 years) are discussed in the new 
Recommendation 7.7, which also discusses 
workplace accommodation. Recommenda­
tion 7.7, for those aged ≥18 years, states 
that for adults with diabetes using diabetes 
technology, reasonable accommodations in 
educational and work settings should in­
clude having sufficient time to manage 
their devices and respond to high and 
low glucose levels.
Recommendation 7.8 discusses early 
initiation of all devices, as indicated based 
on a person’s circumstances. New Rec­
ommendation 7.8a states that there 
should be no requirement of C-peptide 
level, the presence of islet autoantibod­
ies, or duration of insulin treatment be­
fore initiation of CSII or AID.
The “Blood Glucose Monitoring” section 
includes updated literature highlighting the 
benefits of glucose monitoring for people 
with type 2 diabetes. Additionally, it reinfor­
ces the importance of ensuring that individ­
uals using CGM also have access to blood 
glucose monitoring.
Recommendation 7.15 states that use 
of CGM is now recommended at diabetes 
onset and anytime thereafter for children, 
adolescents, and adults with diabetes 
who are on insulin therapy, on nonin­
sulin therapies that can cause hypogly­
cemia, and on any diabetes treatment 
where CGM helps in management.
Recommendation 7.17 briefly discusses 
use of diabetes devices in pregnancy, 
which is discussed in detail in section 15, 
“Diabetes Management in Pregnancy.”
Recommendation 7.25a states that 
AID systems are the preferred insulin 
delivery system for people with type 1 
diabetes and adults and children with 
type 2 diabetes on multiple daily injec­
tions, CSII, or sensor-augmented pump 
therapy and for other forms of insulin- 
deficient diabetes.
Recommendation 7.25b states that AID 
systems can be considered in people with 
type 2 diabetes on basal insulin who 
are not meeting their individualized gly­
cemic goals.
The narrative text further discusses 
that the benefits of CGM have been 
shown regardless of age, sex, education 
or income levels, or baseline diabetes 
characteristics.
Table 7.3 provides updated defini­
tions of types of CGM devices. Intermit­
tently scanned CGM (isCGM) is no longer 
discussed, although it is referenced as an 
older option. The three types of devices 
are now real-time CGM (rtCGM), over- 
the-counter CGM (OTC-CGM), and pro­
fessional CGM.
8. Obesity and Weight Management 
for the Prevention and Treatment of 
Diabetes
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S008)
Recommendation 8.2a was updated to 
state that screening for overweight and 
obesity should occur annually using BMI 
and that an additional measurement of 
body fat (e.g., anthropometric assess­
ment or direct measurement) should be 
S8 
Summary of Revisions                                                                                     
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S6/848824/dc26srev.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
incorporated to confirm excess adipos­
ity where available and feasible.
Recommendation 8.5 was revised to 
clarify that weight loss of 5–7% of base­
line body weight improves glycemia and 
other intermediate cardiovascular risk 
factors.
Recommendation 8.8b was updated 
to clarify components of alternative struc­
tured lifestyle programs and examples of 
modes of delivery.
Recommendation 8.14 was amended 
to recommend counseling and regular 
monitoring for individuals pursuing in­
tentional weight loss on adequate nutri­
tion intake.
Recommendation 8.15 was modified 
to recommend engaging other care team 
members to minimize use of weight- 
promoting medications whenever clinically 
appropriate.
Recommendation 8.20 was added to 
state that the individualized dose and 
dose titration for obesity pharmacother­
apy should balance efficacy, benefits, 
and tolerability.
Recommendation 8.21 on treatment 
modification and intensification approaches 
now includes considering alternative phar­
macologic agents.
Recommendation 8.29 was added to 
include GLP-1 RA–based therapy and/or 
metabolic surgery as treatment options 
for obesity in people with type 1 diabetes.
Table 8.2 was updated with obesity 
pharmacotherapy costs as of 15 July 2025.
9. Pharmacologic Approaches to 
Glycemic Treatment
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S009)
For the glycemic treatment plan for peo­
ple with type 2 diabetes and symptom­
atic heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction (HFpEF), Recommendation 9.9a 
was added to recommend use of a dual 
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypep­
tide (GIP) and GLP-1 RA with demonstrated 
benefits for heart failure–related symptoms 
and reduction in heart failure events, and 
Recommendation 9.9b was revised to in­
clude a GLP-1 RA with demonstrated ben­
efits in heart failure–related symptoms 
and/or reduction in heart failure events.
Recommendation 9.11 was updated 
to include information about initiation 
and continuation of a GLP-1–based ther­
apy for people with type 2 diabetes and 
advanced chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Recommendation 9.12 was revised to 
recommend a GLP-1 RA with demonstrated 
benefits in MASH or a dual GIP and GLP-1 
RA with potential benefits in MASH in 
people with type 2 diabetes, MASLD, 
and overweight or obesity for glycemic 
management.
Recommendation 9.13a was changed 
to state that a GLP-1 RA with beneficial 
effects on MASH is preferred for glyce­
mic management and a pioglitazone or 
a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA with potential 
beneficial effects on MASH can be 
considered for glycemic management 
in adults with type 2 diabetes, biopsy- 
proven MASH, or those at high risk for 
liver fibrosis.
Recommendation 9.24 was revised to 
include healthy behaviors, DSMES, avoid­
ance of therapeutic inertia, and social 
determinants of health as essential com­
ponents of the glycemic treatment plan 
in all people with diabetes.
Recommendation 9.25 was updated 
to recommend use of CGM at diabetes 
onset and anytime thereafter for adults 
with diabetes on insulin therapy, on 
noninsulin therapies that can cause hy­
poglycemia, and on any diabetes treat­
ment where CGM aids in management.
Recommendation 9.27 was modified 
to recommend that AID systems should 
be offered to all adults with type 1 or 
type 2 diabetes on insulin.
New recommendations for glycemic 
management in the context of cancer 
treatment were added. For individuals on 
immunotherapy who develop hyperglyce­
mia, Recommendation 9.33 was added to 
recommend the assessment of these indi­
viduals for the need of insulin therapy to 
prevent potential diabetic ketoacidosis 
and to use additional testing to deter­
mine if hyperglycemia is related to im­
munotherapy-associated diabetes. For 
individuals with hyperglycemia due to 
mTOR inhibitors or PI3K inhibitors, Rec­
ommendations 9.34 and 9.35a state 
that metformin should be considered 
as first-line treatment, and Recommen­
dation 9.35b states that insulin should 
be reserved for severe hyperglycemia 
and hyperglycemic crises due to its po­
tential impact on PI3K inhibitor efficacy. 
For individuals undergoing glucocorti­
coid treatment, Recommendation 9.36 
was added to recommend adjustment 
or initiation of additional glucose-lowering 
therapies to maintain individualized gly­
cemic goals based on the glucocorticoid 
treatment plan and ongoing assessment 
of glucose levels.
New recommendations on glycemic 
treatment in the context of organ trans­
plant were added for adults with post­
transplantation diabetes mellitus or 
preexisting type 2 diabetes and undergo­
ing organ transplantation. For glycemic 
management in the postoperative set­
ting, Recommendation 9.37 was added 
to recommend that insulin is preferred 
and that a dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor 
can be considered for mild hyperglycemia. 
For long-term glycemic management, Rec­
ommendation 9.38a states that noninsulin 
pharmacotherapy can be used and that 
the selection of medication may be con­
tingent upon the transplanted organ(s), 
and Recommendation 9.38b states that a 
GLP-1 RA can be considered due to ad­
ditional cardiometabolic benefits. Recom­
mendation 9.38c was added to recommend 
the addition of insulin to noninsulin phar­
macotherapy if individualized long-term 
glycemic goals cannot be achieved or 
maintained.
A new insulin algorithm for type 1 di­
abetes (Fig. 9.2) was added.
Figure 9.4 was revised to include a 
dual GIP and GLP-1 RA or GLP-1 RA 
for glycemic management for those with 
type 2 diabetes, symptomatic HFpEF, 
MASLD or MASH, and obesity.
Figure 9.5 was revised to suggest 
considering CGM for individuals with 
type 2 diabetes on basal insulin.
Tables 9.3 and 9.4 were updated with 
glucose-lowering medication and insulin 
costs as of 15 July 2025.
10. Cardiovascular Disease and Risk 
Management
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S010)
Recommendation 10.4 was updated to 
state that a systolic blood pressure goal 
<120 mmHg should be encouraged for 
individuals with high cardiovascular or 
kidney risk.
Recommendation 10.6 was modified to 
indicate that blood pressure–lowering phar­
macologic therapy should be titrated to 
achieve individualized blood pressure goals.
Recommendation 10.10 was revised 
to include that an ACE inhibitor or angio­
tensin receptor blocker (ARB) is strongly 
recommended to treat hypertension for 
those with severely increased albumin­
uria and/or estimated glomerular filtra­
tion rate (eGFR) <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 to 
the maximally tolerated dose to prevent 
progression of kidney disease and to re­
duce cardiovascular events.
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                                                            
Summary of Revisions
S9 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S6/848824/dc26srev.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
Recommendation 10.11 was modified 
to specify monitoring frequency for a 
drop in eGFR and increase in serum po­
tassium levels when ACE inhibitors, ARBs, 
or mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists 
(MRAs) are used and monitoring frequency 
for hypokalemia when diuretics are used.
For individuals receiving statin therapy, 
Recommendation 10.32 was revised to 
advise against the addition of fibrate, nia­
cin, or dietary supplements containing n-3 
fatty acids, as they do not confer additional 
cardiovascular risk reduction.
Recommendation 10.40c was modified 
to include people with type 2 diabetes 
and CKD and to recommend a GLP-1 RA 
with demonstrated cardiovascular ben­
efit to reduce the risk of cardiovascular 
events.
Recommendation 10.44c was updated 
to recommend a GLP-1 RA with heart 
failure prevention benefit for people with 
type 2 diabetes and asymptomatic (stage B) 
heart failure with high risk of or established 
cardiovascular disease.
Recommendations 10.44d and 10.44e 
were revised and added to recommend 
a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA or a GLP-1 RA 
with demonstrated benefit for reduction 
in heart failure events and heart failure 
symptoms, respectively, in adults with 
type 2 diabetes, obesity, and symptom­
atic heart failure with preserved ejec­
tion fraction.
Recommendation 10.44h was added 
to recommend a nonsteroidal MRA (nsMRA) 
with proven benefit in reducing worsen­
ing heart failure events for people with 
diabetes and symptomatic stage C heart 
failure with ejection fraction >40%.
Figure 10.5 was added to include an 
overview of prevention and treatment 
of symptomatic heart failure in people 
with diabetes, and Fig. 10.6 was added 
to illustrate the approach to prevent 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease 
(ASCVD) in people with type 2 diabetes.
11. Chronic Kidney Disease and Risk 
Management
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S011)
Recommendation 11.1a was amended to 
clarify the frequency of assessment for 
kidney function.
Recommendation 11.5 was amended 
to clarify goals for blood pressure man­
agement with specific emphasis on sys­
tolic blood pressure goals.
Recommendation 11.6a was updated 
to clarify guidance on intolerance to medi­
cation in nonpregnant individuals with dia­
betes and hypertension.
Recommendation 11.6b was revised 
to specify monitoring frequency for a drop 
in eGFR and increase in serum potassium 
levels and for hypokalemia when ACE in­
hibitors, ARBs, or MRAs are used.
Recommendation 11.8 was changed to 
enhance clarity on potassium level monitor­
ing after initiation of an nsMRA to reduce 
CKD progression and cardiovascular risk.
New Recommendation 11.9 was added 
to state that simultaneous initiation of a so­
dium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) in­
hibitor and an nsMRA can be considered in 
individuals with type 2 diabetes and urine 
albumin-to-creatinine ratio ≥100 mg/g 
with eGFR 30–90 mL/1.73 m2 on a renin- 
angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAS) 
inhibitor.
Recommendation 11.10 was revised 
to clarify guidance on kidney-protective 
medications that are potentially harmful 
in pregnant and sexually active individu­
als of childbearing potential.
Recommendation 11.11a was added 
to address SGLT2 inhibitor use in indi­
viduals who are not on dialysis to re­
duce the risk of CKD progression and 
for cardiovascular benefits.
Recommendation 11.11b was added 
to provide guidance on initiation or con­
tinuation of GLP-1–based therapy in indi­
viduals on dialysis to reduce cardiovascular 
risk.
Figure 11.2 was modified to reorder 
the placement of the RAS inhibitor dose 
to reflect that the majority of the partic­
ipants in kidney outcome trials investi­
gating SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP-1 RAs, and 
nsMRAs were receiving background op­
timized RAS inhibitor therapy.
12. Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and 
Foot Care
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S012)
A new introduction has been added to 
provide appropriate pathophysiological 
context for the subsections, including dis­
cussion of the 40-year Diabetes Control 
and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of 
Diabetes Interventions and Complications 
(DCCT/EDIC) study results.
The narrative was expanded to dis­
cuss the effect of GLP-1 RA treatment 
on eye health, including nonarteritic an­
terior ischemic optic neuropathy, glau­
coma, neovascular age-related macular 
degeneration, and diabetic retinopathy 
progression.
The role of adjunctive therapies was 
broadened to emphasize a holistic, multifac­
torial approach to eye health in diabetes.
Neuropathy diagnosis discussion was 
updated to align more closely with the 
“Foot Care” subsection, incorporating the 
Ipswich touch test.
Recommendation 12.22 was updated 
to emphasize the importance of combi­
nation therapy for additional relief of 
neuropathic pain.
The narrative was strengthened re­
garding prevention and management of 
diabetic foot complications. In this regard, 
the importance of infection and its prompt 
management was added throughout the 
text.
Emerging technologies in foot care are 
now discussed, including self-monitoring 
of foot temperatures using smart mats, in­
soles, or socks for early identification of 
impending ulceration.
The importance of adjunctive advanced 
therapies was emphasized, particularly for 
diabetic foot ulcers unresponsive to stan­
dard care or surgical care. Discussion of 
the Wound Ischemia foot Infection (WIfI) 
staging system for diabetic foot lesions 
was expanded; it is now described as in­
creasingly used to stage peripheral artery 
disease severity, predict diabetic foot ulcer 
healing, and assess amputation risk.
The narrative was updated to high­
light the need for holistic and interven­
tional approaches in managing diabetes 
with peripheral artery disease. Emerging 
evidence was added for GLP-1 RA thera­
pies, which may reduce lower-extremity 
amputations.
13. Older Adults
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S013)
In the “Hypoglycemia” section, Recom­
mendation 13.5 now recommends use of 
CGM for older adults with type 1 diabetes 
or type 2 diabetes on insulin to improve 
glycemic outcomes, reduce hypoglycemia, 
and reduce treatment burden.
In “Treatment Goals,” Recommendation 
13.9 now provides a more specific on- 
treatment blood pressure goal for most 
older adults of <130/80 mmHg when it 
can be achieved safely and a more relaxed 
blood pressure goal (e.g., <140/90 mmHg) 
for people with poor health, limited life ex­
pectancy, or high risk for adverse effects of 
hypertensive therapy.
S10 
Summary of Revisions                                                                                     
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S6/848824/dc26srev.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
In the “Lifestyle Management” section, 
Recommendation 13.11a now includes 
more specific guidance on protein intake 
(at least 0.8 g/kg body weight/day).
In the “Lifestyle Management” sec­
tion, Recommendation 13.11b is now a 
separate recommendation for types of 
exercise and physical activity to maintain 
lean body mass, especially in those pur­
suing intentional weight loss.
Terminology for care in nursing home 
and assisted living settings was stan­
dardized by using the term post-acute 
and long-term care (PALTC).
Table 13.1 has been introduced to 
provide specific guidance for assessing 
older adults with diabetes for geriatric 
syndromes and other functional impair­
ments using sample screening questions 
and validated languages.
Figure 13.2 has been introduced to il­
lustrate a stepwise approach for assess­
ing difficulties in the diabetes treatment 
plan; reevaluating glycemic goals through 
shared decision-making; deintensifying, 
simplifying, or modifying the treatment 
plan; and reassessing the safety and 
burdens of any interventions.
14. Children and Adolescents
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S014)
Section 14 was reorganized to clearly differ­
entiate guidance for type 1 versus type 2 
diabetes in children and adolescents while 
merging sections that applied to both types 
of diabetes in children and adolescents.
Narrative discussions of developmental 
considerations and the impact of obesity 
and psychosocial factors were expanded.
Language in Recommendation 14.1 was 
strengthened to emphasize child and family- 
centered care, ongoing reassessment of self- 
care transfer, and training of daycare and 
school personnel.
Recommendation 14.2 was modified 
to reinforce comprehensive nutrition edu­
cation at diagnosis and annually, tailored to 
growth, eating patterns, and risk factors.
Recommendation 14.3 was expanded 
to include evidence on macronutrient com­
position (carbohydrate, fat, and protein) 
and its impact on insulin dosing, glycemic 
excursions, and long-term outcomes.
The “Physical Activity and Exercise” sec­
tion recommendations now emphasize 
≥60 min/day of moderate-to-vigorous ac­
tivity, with bone- and muscle-strengthening 
activities ≥3 times/week. New guidance 
on strategies to prevent exercise-related 
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia and im­
portance of treatment availability during 
activity was added.
The “Psychosocial Care” section was 
updated to include behavioral health 
professionals as integral team members; 
routine screening for food insecurity, 
housing stability, literacy, and social sup­
port; confidential time for adolescents 
with providers at developmentally appro­
priate ages; screening for diabetes distress, 
depression, anxiety, fear of hypoglycemia, 
and disordered eating behaviors starting as 
early as age 7–8 years; and collaboration 
with behavioral health providers for indi­
vidualized interventions (e.g., cognitive 
behavioral therapy and mindfulness-based 
approaches).
Table 14.1 was added to provide eas­
ier comparison of type 1 and type 2 dia­
betes recommendations. Table 14.1 and 
text were updated to reflect the current 
evidence on lipid screening, microalbu­
minuria, retinopathy, and neuropathy in 
children and adolescents. New evidence 
from SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth 
(SEARCH), Treatment Options for Type 2 
Diabetes in Adolescents and Youth (TODAY), 
and T1D Exchange studies was incorporated 
to refine timing and frequency of screening.
Recommendation language around use 
of CGM, artificial intelligence–based reti­
nal screening tools, and pharmacothera­
pies (i.e., GLP-1 RAs, SGLT2 inhibitors, and 
a dual GIP and GLP-1 RA) was added.
In the “Type 2 Diabetes in Children 
and Adolescents” section, new pharma­
cotherapy data for GLP-1 RAs, SGLT2 in­
hibitors, and the dual GIP and GLP-1 RA 
and their U.S. Food and Drug Adminis­
tration approval status in the pediatric 
population were added with up-to-date 
randomized controlled trial discussion, 
and discussion of metabolic and bariat­
ric surgery outcomes was expanded with 
≥10-year follow-up data.
Recommendations and references in 
the section “Transition From Pediatric to 
Adult Care for All Children and Adolescents 
With Diabetes” were updated to em­
phasize structured transition programs, 
improved clinic attendance, and digital 
tools to support continuity of care.
15. Management of Diabetes in 
Pregnancy
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S015)
Recommendation 15.3 was modified to 
emphasize that preconception counseling 
should include the importance of avoiding 
excessive hypoglycemia in achieving pre­
conception glycemic goals.
The narrative sections “Preconception 
Counseling” and “Preconception Care” 
were reorganized, including consolida­
tion of the counseling pertinent to weight 
management.
The narrative text was updated to in­
clude preconception glucose goals (in 
addition to the preconception A1C goal) 
to guide therapeutic adjustments.
The narrative text was updated to pro­
vide guidance regarding preconception 
discontinuation of GLP-1 RA and dual GIP 
and GLP-1 RA therapy and to emphasize 
that preconception glycemic goals should 
be achieved following discontinuation of 
GLP-1 RA or dual GIP and GLP-1 RA ther­
apy before attempting conception.
The narrative text regarding early 
abnormal glucose metabolism was moved 
from section 2, “Diagnosis and Classification 
of Diabetes,” to the present section and up­
dated to include recent evidence and 
controversies regarding optimal manage­
ment strategies.
The narrative text was updated to include 
recent randomized controlled trials evaluat­
ing CGM use in gestational diabetes mellitus.
The narrative text was updated to 
provide additional information regarding 
use of currently available insulin prepa­
rations during pregnancy.
The narrative text subsections re­
garding CGM use in pregnancy and 
AID use in pregnancy that were pre­
viously included in both section 7, 
“Diabetes Technology,” and section 15, 
“Management of Diabetes in Pregnancy,” 
were consolidated and are now found in 
the present section only.
Recommendation 15.24 was modified 
to use the blood pressure threshold of 
140/90 mmHg for initiation or titration 
of antihypertensive therapy, for both 
clarity and alignment with recent ran­
domized controlled trial data.
Recommendation 15.25b was updated 
to include severe hypertriglyceridemia as 
an additional factor that may in some 
circumstances warrant continued use of 
lipid-lowering therapy during pregnancy.
The narrative text was updated to state 
that, in a small subset of individuals who 
are unable to tolerate or decline the 
postpartum OGTT, an A1C performed 
at 6–12 months postpartum may be 
considered as supplementary diagnos­
tic information, noting that it should 
diabetesjournals.org/care                                                                                                                                                           
Summary of Revisions
S11 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S6/848824/dc26srev.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
not replace the gold standard postpar­
tum OGTT.
16. Diabetes Care in the Hospital
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S016)
Two new recommendations were added 
for glycemic goals in the perioperative 
period. To improve postoperative out­
comes, Recommendation 16.14 suggests 
an A1C goal <8% (<64 mmol/mol) 
within 3 months of elective surgery. 
Alternatively, a 14-day glucose man­
agement indicator goal <8% or time in 
range >50% can also be used. Recom­
mendation 16.15 was added to advise 
a blood glucose range 100–180 mg/dL 
(5.6–10.0 mmol/L) during the periop­
erative period.
For individuals with diabetes not being 
discharged to their home, Recommenda­
tion 16.18 was updated to suggest consid­
ering the capabilities of the facility for 
diabetes management.
Tables 16.1 and 16.2 were included 
to provide information on diagnostic 
criteria and clinical presentation for dia­
betic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic 
hyperosmolar state.
The narrative text was updated to ex­
pand upon technology use in the hospi­
tal setting and noninsulin therapies in 
the perioperative period.
17. Diabetes Advocacy
(https://doi.org/10.2337/dc26-S017)
No revisions have been made for the 
2026 Standards of Care.
S12 
Summary of Revisions                                                                                     
Diabetes Care Volume 49, Supplement 1, January 2026 
Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/49/Supplement_1/S6/848824/dc26srev.pdf by guest on 19 May 2026
